The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer by Homer



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Iliad of Homer

Author: Homer

Release Date: September 2006 [Ebook #6130]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO 8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER***





The Iliad of Homer


Translated by Alexander Pope,

with notes by the
Rev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A.

and

Flaxman's Designs.

1899





CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION.
POPE'S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER
BOOK I.
BOOK II.
BOOK III.
BOOK IV.
BOOK V.
BOOK VI.
BOOK VII.
BOOK VIII.
BOOK IX.
BOOK X.
BOOK XI.
BOOK XII.
BOOK XIII.
BOOK XIV.
BOOK XV.
BOOK XVI.
BOOK XVII.
BOOK XVIII.
BOOK XIX.
BOOK XX.
BOOK XXI.
BOOK XXII.
BOOK XXIII.
BOOK XXIV.
CONCLUDING NOTE.





ILLUSTRATIONS


HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.
MARS.
MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.
THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.
THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.
THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.
VULCAN.
JUPITER.
THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.
JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.
NEPTUNE.
VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.
VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.
VENUS.
Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".
THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.
Map of the Plain of Troy.
VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.
OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.
DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.
JUNO.
HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.
THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.
BOWS AND BOW CASE.
IRIS.
HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.
GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.
JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.
THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.
THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.
PLUTO.
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.
GREEK GALLEY.
PROSERPINE.
ACHILLES.
DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE S-natured old king whom the elegant pen of Florian has
idealized--_Numa Pompilius._

Scepticism hThis cannot be true, because it is
not true; and, that is not true, because it cannot be true." Such seems to
be the style, in which testimony upon testimony, statement upon statement,
is consigned to denial and oblivion.

It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of the
Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken of the
treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to Herodotus.

According to this document, the city of Cumae in Ä†olia, was, at an early
period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of Greece.
Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes. Although poor,
he married, and the result of the union was a girl named Critheis. The
girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the guardianship of
Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this maiden that we "are
indebted for so much happiness." Homer was the first fruit of her juvenile
frailty, and received the name of Melesigenes, from having been born near
the river Meles, in Boeotia, whither Critheis had been transported in
order to save her reputation.

"At this time," continues our narrative, "there lived at Smyrna a man
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being married,
engaged Critheis to manage his household, and spin the flax he received as
the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was her performance
of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made proposals of
marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement, willing to adopt her
son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man, if he were carefully
brought up."

They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his prsome time he stood wondering
how a blind man should have reached such a place alone, and what could be
his design in coming. He then went up to him, and inquired who he was, and
how he had come to desolate places and untrodden spots, and of what he
stood in need. Homer, by recounting to him the whole history of his
misfortunes, moved him with compassion; and he took him, and led him to
his cot, and having lit a fire, bade him sup.(9)

"The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according to
their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O Glaucus, my
friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs their supper at
the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since, whilst they watch, nor
thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.

Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author. Having
finished supper, they banqueted(10) afresh on conversation, Homer
narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had visited.

At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left Homer
at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus, a place
near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole story
respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to what he
said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and feeding maimed
and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the stranger to him.

Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him, assuring
him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon showed that
the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general knowledge, and the
Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the charge of his
children.(11)

Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of
Chios he established a school where he (18)

But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and fostered,
without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions by minute
analysis--our editorial office compels us to give some attention to the
doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric question is beset, and to
entreat our reader, for a brief period, to prefer his judgment to his
imagination, and to condescend to dry details.

Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of this
unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must express my
sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following remarks:--

"We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the better,
the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its original
composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that its primitive
integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to assert, that the
minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not the best qualification
for the profound feeling, the comprehensive conception of an harmonious
whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be no judge of the symmetry of the
human frame: and we would take the opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on
the proportions and general beauty of a form, rather than that of Mr.
Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

"There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines of
Pope.--

  "'The critic eye--that microscope of wit
  Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit,
  How parts relate to parts, or they to whole
  The body's harmony, the beaming soul,
  Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
  When man's whole frame is obvious to a flea.'"(19)

Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning the
unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and cautious
Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,(20) the
authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern critics.
Longi considerable
change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the Homeric poems
could have suffered by this change, had written copies been preserved. If
Chaucer's poetry, for instance, had not been written, it could only have
come down to us in a softened form, more like the effeminate version of
Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble original.

"At what period," continues Grote, "these poems, or indeed any other Greek
poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture, though
there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of Solon. If, in
the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any more determinate
period, the question a once suggests itself, What were the purposes which,
in that state of society, a manuscript at its first commencement must have
been intended to answer? For whom was a written Iliad necessary? Not for
the rhapsodes; for with them it was not only planted in the memory, but
also interwoven with the feelings, and conceived in conjunction with all
those flexions and intonations of voice, pauses, and other oral artifices
which were required for emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript
could never reproduce. Not for the general public--they were accustomed to
receive it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a
solemn and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad
would be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class
of readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed. If
we could discover at what time such a class first began to be formed, we
should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic poems were
firstubordinate and insignificant
    part. Even the few passages which relate to their ancestors, Mr.
    Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible, indeed, that
    in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic fact,
    that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
    the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the
    chieftain of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his
    forces, may have been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian
    sovereign; the preeminent value of the ancient poetry on the
    Trojan war may thus have forced the national feeling of the
    Athenians to yield to their taste. The songs which spoke of their
    own great ancestor were, no doubt, of far inferior sublimity and
    popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid would have been much
    more likely to have emanated from an Athenian synod of compilers
    of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid. Could France
    have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the hero of
    the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
    sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all
    its direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the
    poetic cycle, as to admit no rivalry,--it is still surprising, that
    throughout the whole poem the _callida junctura_ should never
    betray the workmanship of an Athenian hand, and that the national
    spirit of a race, who have at a later period not inaptly been
    compared to our self admiring neighbours, the French, should
    submit with lofty self denial to the almost total exclusion of
    their own ancestors--or, at least, to the questionable dignity of
    only having produced a leader tolerably skilled in the military
    tactics of his age."(27)


To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that Wolf's
objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey have never
been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they have follows:--


    "No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common
    sailors of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to 'discourse
    in excellent music' among them. Many of these, like those of the
    negroes in the United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to
    events passing around them. But what was passing around them? The
    grand events of a spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to
    impress themselves, as the mystical legends of former times had
    done, upon their memory; besides which, a retentive memory was
    deemed a virtue of the first water, and was cultivated accordingly
    in those ancient times. Ballads at first, and down to the
    beginning of the war with Trgoras. However, Solon first, and then
    Peisistratus, and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the
    poems, and restored the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their
    original integrity in a great measure."(33)


Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which have
developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I must
still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of the
Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations disfigure
them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here and there
have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of the copyist,
would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is to a higher
criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or enjoy
these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of their one
author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari eum jus
fasque sit,_ I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of historical
evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these great works to
a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal evidence, and that
which springs from the deepest and most immediate impulse of the soul,
also speaks eloquently to the contrary.

The minutiae of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise. Indeed,
considering the character of some of my own books, such an attempt would
be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its importance in a
philological view, I am inclined to set little store on its aesthetic
value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the emendations made upon
poets are mere alterations, some of which, had they been suggested to the
author by his Maecenas or Africanus, he would probably have adopted.
Moreover, those who are most exact in laying down rules of verbal
criticism and interpretation, are often least competent to carry out their
own precepts. Grammarians are not poets by profession, but may be so _per
accidens._ I do not at this moment remember two emendations o still less, to compass the powers by which the
greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were faith no
virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our ignorance on any
matter. But we are too well taught the contrary lesson; and it seems as
though our faith should be especially tried touching the men and the
events which have wrought most influence upon the condition of humanity.
And there is a kind of sacredness attached to the memory of the great and
the good, which seems to bid us repulse the scepticism which would
allegorize their existence into a pleasing apologue, and measure the
giants of intellect by an homeopathic dynameter.

Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply wrapped
in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots which mere
analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem we must transform
ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination must fight over
the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the same sense of injury,
as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but attain this degree of
enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely suffice for the reading of
Homer), we shall feel that the poems of Homer are not only the work of one
writer, but of the greatest writer that ever touched the hearts of men by
the power of song.

And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems their
powerful influence over the minds of the men of old. Heeren, who is
evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely observes:--


    "It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No
    poet has ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his
    countrymen. Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the
    character of other nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that
    of the Greeks. This is a feature in their character which wasr most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
amphikupellon being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be it from us
to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapman's fine,
bold, rough old English;--far be it from, us to hold up his translation as
what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can still dismiss Pope's
Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the consciousness that they must
have read a very great number of books before they have read its fellow.

As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn up without
pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the general reader. Having
some little time since translated all the works of Homer for another
publisher, I might have brought a large amount of accumulated matter,
sometimes of a critical character, to bear upon the text. But Pope's
version was no field for such a display; and my purpose was to touch
briefly on antiquarian or mythological allusions, to notice occasionally
_some_ departures from the original, and to give a few parallel passages
from our English Homer, Milton. In the latter task I cannot pretend to
novelty, but I trust that my other annotations, while utterly disclaiming
high scholastic views, will be found to convey as much as is wanted; at
least, as far as the necessary limits of these volumes could be expected
to admit. To write a commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I
have made Pope's translation a little more entertaining and instructive to
a mass of miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily
accomplished.

                                                   THEODORE arly and everywhere irresistibly.

I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in a
manner superior to that of any poet through all the main constituent parts
of his work: as it is the great and peculiar characteristic which
distinguishes him from all other authors.

This strong and ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in the
violence of its course, drew all things within its vortex. It seemed not
enough to have taken in the whole circle of arts, and the whole compass of
nature, to supply his maxims and reflections; all the inward passions and
affections of mankind, to furnish his characters: and all the outward
forms and images of things for his descriptions: but wanting yet an ampler
sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new and boundless walk for his
imagination, and created a world for himself in the invention of fable.
That which Aristotle calls "the soul of poetry," was first breathed into
it by Homer, I shall begin with considering him in his part, as it is
naturally the first; and I speak of it both as it means the design of a
poem, and as it is taken for fiction.

Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the
marvellous. The probable fable is the recital of such actions as, though
they did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature; or of such
as, though they did, became fables by the additional episodes and manner
of telling them. Of this sort is the main story of an epic poem, "The
return of Ulysses, the settlement of the Trojans in Italy," or the like.
That of the Iliad is the "anger of Achilles," the most short and single
subject that ever was chosen by any poet. Yet this he has supplied with a
vaster variety of incidents and events, and crowded with a greater number
of councils, speeches, battles, and episodes of all kinds, than are to be
found even in those poems whose schemes are of the utmost latitude and
irregularity. The action is hurried on with the most vehement spirit, and
its whole duration employs not so much as firage of Agamemnon is inspirited by
love of empire and ambition; that of Menelaus mixed with softness and
tenderness for his people: we find in Idomeneus a plain direct soldier; in
Sarpedon a gallant and generous one. Nor is this judicious and astonishing
diversity to be found only in the principal quality which constitutes the
main of each character, but even in the under parts of it, to which he
takes care to give a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main
characters of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct
in this, that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other
natural, open, and regular. But they have, besides, characters of courage;
and this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference
of his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other
upon experience. It would be endless to produce instances of these kinds.
The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open manner;
they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and, where they
are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to those of Homer.
His characters of valour are much alike; even that of Turnus seems no way
pecuor the sense, but justly great
in proportion to it. It is the sentiment that swells and fills out the
diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it, for in the same
degree that a thought is warmer, an expression will be brighter, as that
is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like glass in the
furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to a greater
clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and the heat more
intense.

To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected the
compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper to
poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted and
filled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise conduced in
some measure to thicken the images. On this last consideration I cannot
but attribute these also to the fruitfulness of his invention, since (as
he has managed them) they are a sort of supernumerary pictures of the
persons or things to which they were joined. We see the motion of Hector's
plumes in the epithet Korythaiolos, the landscape of Mount Neritus in that
of Einosiphyllos, and so of others, which particular images could not have
been insisted upon so long as to express them in a description (though but
of a single line) without diverting the reader too much from the principal
action or figure. As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these epithets
is a short description.

Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be sensible what a
share of praise is due to his invention in that also. He was not satisfied
with his language as he found it settled in any one part of Greece, but
searched through its different dialects with this particular view, to
beautify and perfect his numbers he considered these as they had a greater
mixture of vowels or consonants, and accordingly employed them as the
verse required either a greater smoothness or strength. What he most
affected was the Ionic, which has a peculiar sweetness, from its never
using contractionst parts, as with great virtues, they
naturally border on some imperfection; and it is often hard to distinguish
exactly where the virtue ends, or the fault begins. As prudence may
sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment decline to coldness;
and as magnanimity may run up to profusion or extravagance, so may a great
invention to redundancy or wildness. If we look upon Homer in this view,
we shall perceive the chief objections against him to proceed from so
noble a cause as the excess of this faculty.

Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon which so
much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds of
probability. Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as with
gigantic bodies, which, exerting themselves with unusual strength, exceed
what is commonly thought the due proportion of parts, to become miracles
in the whole; and, like the old heroes of that make, commit something near
extravagance, amidst a series of glorious and inimitable performances.
Thus Homer has his "speaking horses;" and Virgil his "myrtles distilling
blood;" where the latter has not so much as contrived the easy
intervention of a deity to save the probability.

It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have been thought
too exuberant and full of circumstances. The force of this faculty is seen
in nothing more, than in its inability to confine itself to that single
circumstance upon which the comparison is grounded: it runs out into
embellishments of additional images, which, however, are so managed as not
to overpower the main one. His similes are like pictures, where the
principal figure has not only its proportion given agreeable to the
original, but is also set off with occasional ornaments and prospects. The
same will account for his manner of heaping a number of comparisons
together in one breath, when his fancy suggested to him at once so many
various and correspondent images. The reader will easily extend this
observation to more objections of the same kindnd moral of the Ä†neis to those of the Iliad, for
the same reasons which might set the Odyssey above the Ä†neis; as that the
hero is a wiser man, and the action of the one more beneficial to his
country than that of the other; or else they blame him for not doing what
he never designed; as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a prince
as Ä†neas, when the very moral of his poem required a contrary character:
it is thus that Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil. Others
select those particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as
some that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of
Scaliger in his Poetics. Others quarrel with what they take for low and
mean expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy and refinement,
oftener from an ignorance of the graces of the original, and then triumph
in the awkwardness of their own translations: this is the conduct of
Perrault in his Parallels. Lastly, there are others, who, pretending to a
fairer proceeding, distinguish between the personal merit of Homer, and
that of his work; but when they come to assign the causes of the great
reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the ignorance of his times,
and the prejudice of those that followed: and in pursuance of this
principle, they make those accidents (such as the contention of the
cities, &c.) to be the causes of his fame, which were in reality the
consequences of his merit. The same might as well be said of Virgil, or
any great author whose general character will infallibly raise many casual
additions to their reputation. This is the method of Mons. de la Mott; who
yet cnd straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (the certain
signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping in his train,
while the poet himself is all the time proceeding with an unaffected and
equal majesty before them. However, of the two extremes one could sooner
pardon frenzy than frigidity; no author is to be envied for such
commendations, as he may gain by that character of style, which his
friends must agree together to call simplicity, and the rest of the world
will call dulness. There is a graceful and dignified simplicity, as well
as a bold and sordid one; which differ as much from each other as the air
of a plain man from that of a sloven: it is one thing to be tricked up,
and another not to be dressed at all. Simplicity is the mean between
ostentation and rusticity.

This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in such perfection as in the
Scripture and our author. One may affirm, with all respect to the inspired
writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other words but what were
intelligible and common to men at that time, and in that part of the
world; and, as Homer is the author nearest to those, his style must of
course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books than that of any
other writer. This consideration (together with what has been observed of
the parity of some of his thoughts) may, methinks, induce a translator, on
the one hand, to give in to several of those general phrases and manners
of expression, which have attained a veneration even in our language from
being used in the Old Testament; as, on the other, to avoid those which
have been appropriated to the Divinity, and in a manner consigned to
mystery and religion.

For a further preservation of this air of simplicity, a particular care
should be taken to express with all plainness those moral sentences and
proverbial speeches which are so numerous in this poet. They have
something venerable, and as I may say, oracular, in that unadorned gravity
and shortness with which they are delivered: a graceoriginal writings, as
in the tragedy of Bussy d'Amboise, &c. In a word, the nature of the man
may account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface
and remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in
poetry. His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than
fifteen weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But
that which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover
his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation, which
is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have writ
before he arrived at years of discretion.

Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but for
particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often omits
the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close translation, I doubt
not many have been led into that error by the shortness of it, which
proceeds not from his following the original line by line, but from the
contractions above mentioned. He sometimes omits whole similes and
sentences; and is now and then guilty of mistakes, into which no writer of
his learning could have fallen, but through carelessness. His poetry, as
well as Ogilby's, is too mean for criticism.

It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did not live to
translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a small part
of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly interpreted the
sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of
the haste he was obliged to write in. He seems to have had too much regard
to Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies, and has unhappily followed
him in passages where he wanders from the original. However, had he
translated the whole work, I would no more have attempted Homir. The
particular zeal of Mr. Harcourt (the son of the late Lord Chancellor) gave
me a proof how much I am honoured in a share of his friendship. I must
attribute to the same motive that of several others of my friends: to whom
all acknowledgments are rendered unnecessary by the privileges of a
familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I can no way better oblige men
of their turn than by my silence.

In short, I have found more patrons than ever Homer wanted. He would have
thought himself happy to have met the same favour at Athens that has been
shown me by its learned rival, the University of Oxford. And I can hardly
envy him those pompous honours he received after death, when I reflect on
the enjoyment of so many agreeable obligations, and easy friendships,
which make the satisfact. The scene lies in the Grecian camp, then changes to Chrysa, and
lastly to Olympus.

  Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
  Of woes unnumber'd, heavenly goddess, sing!
  That wrath which hurl'd to Pluto's gloomy reign
  The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
  Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
  Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.(41)
  Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
  Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove!(42)

  Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour(43)
  Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power
  Latona's son a dire contagion spread,(44)
  And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
  The king of men his reverent priest defied,(45)
  And for the king's offence the people died.

  For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
  His captive daughter from the victor's chain.
  Suppliant the venerable father stands;
  Apollo's awful ensigns grace his hands
  By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
  Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
  He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings, of Atreus' royal race(46)

  "Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown'd,
  And Troy's proud walls lie level with the ground.
  May Jove restore you when your toils are o'er
  Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
  But, oh! relieve a wretched parent's pain,
  And give Chryseis to these arms again;
  If mercy fail, yet let my presents move,
  And dread avenging Phoebus, son of Jove."

  The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare,
  The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
  Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,
  Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied:

  "Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,
  Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains
  Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
  Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.
  Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;
  And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;
  Till time shall rifle every youthful grace,
  And ag  Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
  That he alone has fought and bled in vain."
  "Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies),
  Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
  Would'st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,
  The due reward of many a well-fought field?

  The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,
  We share with justice, as with toil we gain;
  But to resume whate'er thy avarice craves
  (That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
  Yet if our chief for plunder only fight,
  The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,
  Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
  Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers."

  Then thus the king: "Shall I my prize resign
  With tame content, and thou possess'd of thine?
  Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,
  Think not to rob me of a soldier's right.
  At thy demand shall I restore the maid?
  First let the just equivalent be paid;
  Such as a king might ask; and let it be
  A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
  Or grant me this, or with a monarch's claim
  This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
  The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;(55)
  Ulysses' spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
  The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
  And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
  But this when time requires.--It now remains
  We launch a bark to plough the watery plains,
  And waft the sacrifice to Chrysa's shores,
  With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
  Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,
  And some deputed prince the charge attend:
  This Creta's king, or Ajax shall fulfil,
  Or wise Ulysses see perform'd our will;
  Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,
  Achilles' self conduct her o'er the main;
  Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
  The god propitiate, and the pest assuage."

                          [Illustration: MARS.]

                                  MARS.


  At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied:
  "O tyrant, arm'd with insolence and pride!
  Inglorious slave to interavest Greek thy foe."

  He spoke; and furious hurl'd against the ground
  His sceptre starr'd with golden studs around:
  Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain
  The raging king return'd his frowns again.

  To calm their passion with the words of age,
  Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,
  Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd;
  Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill'd:(58)
  Two generations now had pass'd away,
  Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
  Two ages o'er his native realm he reign'd,
  And now the example of the third remain'd.
  All view'd with awe the venerable man;
  Who thus with mild benevolence began:--

  "What shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy
  To Troy's proud monarch, and the friends of Troy!
  That adverse gods commit to stern debate
  The best, the bravest, of the Grecian state.
  Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain,
  Nor think your Nestor's years and wisdom vain.
  A godlike race of heroes once I knew,
  Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!
  Lives there a chief to match Pirithous' fame,
  Dryas the bold, or Ceneus' deathless name;
  Theseus, endued with more than mortal might,
  Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?
  With these of old, to toils of battle bred,
  In early youth my hardy days I led;
  Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breeds,
  And smit with love of honourable deeds,
  Strongest of men, they pierced the mountain boar,
  Ranged the wild deserts red with monsters' gore,
  And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore:
  Yet these with soft persuasive arts I sway'd;
  When Nestor spoke, they listen'd and obey'd.
  If in my youth, even these esteem'd me wise;
  Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise.
  Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave;
  That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave:
  Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride;
  Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside.
  Thee, the first honours of the war adorn,
  Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born;
  Him, awful ts the crime, and thence derives the woes:
  Myself the first the assembled chiefs incline
  To avert the vengeance of the power divine;
  Then rising in his wrath, the monarch storm'd;
  Incensed he threaten'd, and his threats perform'd:
  The fair Chryseis to her sire was sent,
  With offer'd gifts to make the god relent;
  But now he seized Briseis' heavenly charms,
  And of my valour's prize defrauds my arms,
  Defrauds the votes of all the Grecian train;(63)
  And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain.
  But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.
  To high Olympus' shining court ascend,
  Urge all the ties to former service owed,
  And sue for vengeance to the thundering god.
  Oft hast thou triumph'd in the glorious boast,
  That thou stood'st forth of all the ethereal host,
  When bold rebellion shook the realms above,
  The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:
  When the bright partner of his awful reign,
  The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,
  The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven,
  Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
  Then, call'd by thee, the monster Titan came
  (Whom gods Briareus, men Ä†geon name),
  Through wondering skies enormous stalk'd along;
  Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong:
  With giant-pride at Jove's high throne he stands,
  And brandish'd round him all his hundred hands:
  The affrighted gods confess'd their awful lord,
  They dropp'd the fetters, trembled, and adored.(64)
  This, goddess, this to his remembrance call,
  Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;
  Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
  To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,
  To heap the shores with copious death, and bring
  The Greeks to know the curse of such a king.
  Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head
  O'er all his wide dominion of the dead,
  And mourn in blood that e'er he durst disgrace
  The boldest warrior of the Grecian race."

  [Illustration: THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.]

          THETIS CALLING BRIAREUser press'd,
  Still grasp'd his knees, and urged the dear request.
  "O sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear;
  Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
  Or oh! declare, of all the powers above,
  Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?"

  She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies,
  Who rolls the thunder o'er the vaulted skies:

  "What hast thou ask'd? ah, why should Jove engage
  In foreign contests and domestic rage,
  The gods' complaints, and Juno's fierce alarms,
  While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms?
  Go, lest the haughty partner of my sway
  With jealous eyes thy close access survey;
  But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped:
  Witness the sacred honours of our head,
  The nod that ratifies the will divine,
  The faithful, fix'd, irrevocable sign;
  This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vows--"
  He spoke, and awful bends his sable brows,(70)
  Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod,
  The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:
  High heaven with trembling the dread signal took,
  And all Olympus to the centre shook.(71)

  Swift to the seas profound the goddess flies,
  Jove to his starry mansions in the skies.
  The shining synod of the immortals wait
  The coming god, and from their thrones of state
  Arising silent, wrapp'd in holy fear,
  Before the majesty of heaven appear.
  Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne,
  All, but the god's imperious queen alone:
  Late had she view'd the silver-footed dame,
  And all her passions kindled into flame.
  "Say, artful managee proposal was embraced. Then he assembles the whole
host, and upon moving for a return to Greece, they unanimously agree to
it, and run to prepare the ships. They are detained by the management of
Ulysses, who chastises the insolence of Thersites. The assembly is
recalled, several speeches made on the occasion, and at length the advice
of Nestor followed, which was to make a general muster of the troops, and
to divide them into their several nations, before they proceeded to
battle. This gives occasion to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the
Greeks and Trojans, and in a large cataloguods.

  Now rosy Morn ascends the court of Jove,
  Lifts up her light, and opens day above.
  The king despatch'd his heralds with commands
  To range the camp and summon all the bands:
  The gathering hosts the monarch's word obey;
  While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.
  In his black ship the Pylian prince he found;
  There calls a senate of the peers around:
  The assembly placed, the king of men express'd
  The counsels labouring in his artful breast.

  "Friends and confederates! with attentive ear
  Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
  Late as I slumber'd in the shades of night,
  A dream divine appear'd before my sight;
  Whose visionary form like Nestor came,
  The same in habit, and in mien the same.(80)
  The heavenly phantom hover'd o'er my head,
  'And, dost thou sleep, O Atreus' son? (he said)
  Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
  Directs in council, and in war presides;
  To whom its safety a whole people owes,
  To waste long nights in indolent repose.
  Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear,
  Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
  In just array draw forth the embattled train,
  And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;
  E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.

  This he for ever leave the Trojan wall!
  Our weeping wives, our tender children call:
  Love, duty, safety, summon us away,
  'Tis nature's voice, and nature we obey,
  Our shatter'd barks may yet transport us o'er,
  Safe and inglorious, to our native shore.
  Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars employ,
  And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy."

  His deep design unknown, the hosts approve
  Atrides' speech. The mighty numbers move.
  So roll the billows to the Icarian shore,
  From east and south when winds begin to roar,
  Burst their dark mansions in the clouds, and sweep
  The whitening surface of the ruffled deep.
  And as on corn when western gusts descend,(85)
  Before the blast the lofty harvests bend:
  Thus o'er the field the moving host appears,
  With nodding plumes and groves of waving spears.
  The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feet
  Beat the loose sands, and thicken to the fleet;
  With long-resounding cries they urge the train
  To fit the ships, and launch into the main.
  They toil, they sweat, thick clouds of dust arise,
  The doubling clamours echo to the skies.
  E'en then the Greeks had left the hostile plain,
  And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain;
  But Jove's imperial queen their flight survey'd,
  And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid:

  "Shall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace!
  And leave unpunish'd this perfidious race?
  Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse,
  In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?
  And bravest chiefs, in Helen's quarrel slain,
  Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
  No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms,
  Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
  Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain,
  Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main."

  Pallas obeys, and from Olympus' height
  Swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
  Ulysses, first in public cares, she found,
  For prudent counsel like the gods renown'd:
  Oppress'd with generous grief the hero stood,
  Nor drew his sable vessels to the f
  Sedition silence, and assert the throne."

  'Twas thus the general voice the hero praised,
  Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised:
  The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend,
  (In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend.
  The expecting crowds in still attention hung,
  To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
  Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke,
  His silence thus the prudent hero broke:

  "Unhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race
  With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
  Not such at Argos was their generous vow:
  Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now:
  Ne'er to return, was then the common cry,
  Till Troy's proud structures should in ashes lie.
  Behold them weeping for their native shore;
  What could their wives or helpless children more?
  What heart but melts to leave the tender train,
  And, one short month, endure the wintry main?
  Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat,
  When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat:
  Then well may this long stay provoke their tears,
  The tedious length of nine revolving years.
  Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame;
  But vanquish'd! baffled! oh, eternal shame!
  Expect the time to Troy's destruction given.
  And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven.
  What pass'd at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,(89)
  And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.
  Beside a fountain's sacred brink we raised
  Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed:
  'Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around,
  The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground
  A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent;
  From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
  Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he roll'd,
  And curl'd around in many a winding fold;
  The topmost branch a mother-bird possess'd;
  Eight callow infants fill'd the mossy nest;
  Herself the ninth; the serpent, as he hung,
  Stretch'd his black jaws and crush'd the crying young;
  While hovering near, with miserable moan,
  The drooping mother wail'd her cre bade the noblest of the Grecian peers;
  And Nestor first, as most advanced in years.
  Next came Idomeneus,(93)
  and Tydeus' son,(94)
  Ajax the less, and Ajax Telamon;(95)
  Then wise Ulysses in his rank was placed;
  And Menelaus came, unbid, the last.(96)
  The chiefs surround the destined beast, and take
  The sacred offering of the salted cake:
  When thus the king prefers his solemn prayer;
  "O thou! whose thunder rends the clouded air,
  Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy throne,
  Supreme of gods! unbounded, and alone!
  Hear! and before the burning sun descends,
  Before the night her gloomy veil extends,
  Low in the dust be laid yon hostile spires,
  Be Priam's palace sunk in Grhe plains are cover'd o'er,
  And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
  Along the river's level meads they stand,
  Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land,
  Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play,
  The wandering nation of a summer's day:
  That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours,
  In gather'd swarms surround the rural bowers;
  From pail to pail with busy murmur run
  The gilded legions, glittering in the sun.
  So throng'd, so close, the Grecian squadrons stood
  In radiant arms, and thirst for Trojan blood.
  Each leader now his scatter'd force conjoins
  In close array, and forms the deepening lines.
  Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swain
  Collects his flocks from thousands on the plain.
  The king of kings, majestically tall,
  Towers o'er his armies, and outshines them all;
  Like some proud bull, that round the pastures leads
  His subject herds, the monarch of the meads,
  Great as the gods, the exalted chief was seen,
  His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his mien;(99)
  Jove o'er his eyes celestial glories spread,
  And dawning conquest played around his head.

  Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine,
  All-knowing goddesses! immortal nine!(100)
  Since earth's wide regions, heaven's umneasur'd height,
  And hell's abyss, hide nothing from your sight,
  (We, wretched mortals! lost in doubts below,
  But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,)
  O say what heroes, fired by thirst of fame,
  Or urged by wrongs, to Troy's destruction came.
  To count them all, demands a thousand tongues,
  A throat of brass, and adamantine lungs.
  Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by you
  The mighty labour dauntless I pursue;
  What crowded armies, from what climes they bring,
  Their names, their numbers, and their chiefs I sing.

                     THE CATALOGUE OF THE SHIPS.(1  In fourscore barks they plough the watery way.

  The proud Mycene arms her martial powers,
  Cleone, Corinth, with imperial towers,(103)
  Fair Araethyrea, Ornia's fruitful plain,
  And Ä†gion, and Adrastus' ancient reign;
  And those who dwell along the sandy shore,
  And where Pellene yields her fleecy store,
  Where Helice and Hyperesia lie,
  And Gonoessa's  was heard to sing,
  His hand no more awaked the silver string.

  Where under high Cyllene, crown'd with wood,
  The shaded tomb of old Ä†pytus stood;
  From Ripe, Stratie, Tegea's bordering towns,
  The Phenean fields, and Orchomenian downs,
  Where the fat herds in plenteous pasture rove;
  And Stymphelus with her surrounding grove;
  Parrhasia, on her snowy cliffs reclined,
  And high Enispe shook by wintry wind,
  And fair Mantinea's ever-pleasing site;
  In sixty sail the Arcadian bands unite.
  Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head,
  (Ancaeus' son) the mighty squadron led.
  Their ships, supplied by Agamemnon's care,
  Through roaring seas the wondering warriors bear;
  The first to battle on the appointed plain,
  But new to all the dangers of the main.

  Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join;
  Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine,
  And bounded there, where o'er the valleys rose
  The Olenian rock; and where Alisium flows;
  Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came:
  The strength and glory of the Epean name.
  In separate squadrons these their train divide,
  Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.
  One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one;
  (Eurytus' this, and that Teatus' son;)
  Diores sprung from Amarynceus' line;
  And great Polyxenus, of force divine.

  But those who view fair Elis o'er the seas
  From the blest islands of the Echinades,
  In forty vessels under Meges move,
  Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove:
  To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled,
  And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.

  Ulysses follow'd through the watery road,
  A chief, in wisdom equal to a god.
  With those whom Cephalenia's line inclosed,
  Or till their fields along the coast opposed;
  Or where fair Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
  Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods,
  Where Ä†gilipa's rugged sides are seen,
  Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
  These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores,
  Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores.

  Thoas came next, Andona lifts her holy trees;
  Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides,
  And into Peneus rolls his easy tides;
  Yet o'er the silvery surface pure they flow,
  The sacred stream unmix'd with streams below,
  Sacred and awful! from the dark abodes
  Styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods!

  Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood,
  (Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredon's blood;)
  Who dwell where Pelion, crown'd with piny boughs,
  Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows;
  Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus stray'd:
  (The region stretch'd beneath his mighty shade:)
  In forty sable barks they stemm'd the main;
  Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian train.

  Say next, O Muse! of all Achaia breeds,
  Who bravest fought, or rein'd the noblest steeds?
  Eumelus' mares were foremost in the chase,
  As eagles fleet, and of Pheretian race;
  Bred where Pieria's fruitful fountains flow,
  And train'd by him who bears the silver bow.
  Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a flame,
  Their height, their colour, and their age the same;
  O'er fields of death they whirl the rapid car,
  And break the ranks, and thunder through the war.
  Ajax in arms the first renown acquired,
  While stern Achilles in his wrath retired:
  (His was the strength that mortal migrsers thunder o'er the plains.

  The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renown'd,
  March from Larissa's ever-fertile ground:
  In equal arms their brother leaders shine,
  Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the divine.

  Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts,
  In dread array, from Thracia's wintry coasts;
  Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars,
  And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores.

  With great Euphemus the Ciconians move,
  Sprung from Troezenian Ceus, loved by Jove.

  Pyraechmes the Paeonian troops attend,
  Skill'd in the fight their crooked bows to bend;
  From Axius' ample bed he leads them on,
  Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,
  Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floating region fills.

  The Paphlagonians Pylaemenes rules,
  Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules,
  Where Erythinus' rising cliffs are seen,
  Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green,
  And where Ä†gialus and Cromna lie,
  And lofty Sesamus invades the sky,
  And where Parthenius, roll'd through banks of flowers,
  Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers.

  Here march'd in arms the Halizonian band,
  Whom Odius and Epistrophus command,
  From those far regions where the sun refines
  The ripening silver in Alybean mines.

  There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train,
  And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain;
  For stern Achilles lopp'd his sacred head,
  Roll'd down Scamander with the vulgar dead.

  Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite
  The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight.

  Of those who round Maeonia's realms reside,
  Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide,
  Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake,
  Born on the banks of Gyges' silent lake.
  There, from the fields where wild Maeander flows,
  High Mycale, and Latmos' shady brows,
  And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs,
  With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.(107)
  Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train,
  Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,
  Who, trick'd with gold, and glitte
  Advanced with steps majestically slow:
  While round his dauntless head the Grelied:

  "Me too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal right
  A world engages in the toils of fight.
  To me the labour of the field resign;
  Me Paris injured; all the war be mine.
  Fall he that must, beneath his rival's arms;
  And live the rest, secure of future harms.
  Two lambs, devoted by your country's rite,
  To earth a sable, to the sun a white,
  Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bring
  Select to Jove, the inviolable king.
  Let reverend Priam in the truce engage,
  And add the sanction of considerate age;
  His sons are faithless, headlong in debate,
  And youth itself an empty wavering state;
  Cool age advances, venerably wise,
  Turns on all hands its deep-discerning eyes;
  Sees what befell, and what may yet befall,
  Concludes from both, and best provides for all.

  The nations hear with rising hopes possess'd,
  And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.
  Within the lines they drew their steeds around,
  And from their chariots issued on the ground;
  Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore,
  Laid their bright arms along the sable shore.
  On either side the meeting hosts are seen
  With lances fix'd, and close the space between.
  Two heralds now, despatch'd to Troy, invite
  The Phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite.

  Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring
  The lamb for Jove, the inviolable king.

  Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skies
  The various goddess of the rainbow flies:
  (Like fair Laodice in form and face,
  The loveliest nymph of Priam's royal race:)
  Her in the palace, at her loom she found;
  The golden web her own sad story crown'd,
  The Trojan wars she weaved (herself the prize)
  And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes.
  To whom the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Approach, and view the wondrous scene below!(112)
  Each hardy Greek, and valiant Trojan knight,
  So dreadful late, and furious for the fight,
  Now rest their spears, or lean upon their shields;
  Ceased is the war, and silent all the fields.
  Paris alone and Sparta's king adver's cause."

  So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothers' doom;(118)
  Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb;
  Adorn'd with honours in their native shore,
  Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more.

  Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town.
  Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.
  Idaeus' arms the golden goblets press'd,(119)
  Who thus the venerable king address'd:
  "Arise, O father of the Trojan state!
  The nations call, thy joyful people wait
  To seal the truce, and end the dire debate.
  Paris, thy son, and Sparta's king advance,
  In measured lists to toss the weighty lance;
  And who his rival shall in arms subdue,
  His be the dame, and his the treasure too.
  Thus with a lasting league our toils may cease,
  And Troy possess her fertile fields  The lists of combat, and the ground inclose:
  Next to decide, by sacred lots prepare,
  Who first shall launch his pointed spear in air.
  The people pray with elevated hands,
  garment rends,
  And glancing downward, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan, bending from the blow,
  Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe:
  But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook
  Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook;
  The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand,
  Broke short: the fragments glitter'd on the sand.
  The raging warrior to the spacious skies
  Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes:
  "Then is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
  And is it thus the gods assist the just?
  When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies;
  The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies."
  Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew
  (Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew;
  Struggling he followed, while the embroider'd thong
  That tied his helmet, dragg'd the chief along.
  Then had his ruin crown'd Atrides' joy,
  But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy:
  Unseen she came, and burst the golden band;
  And left an empty helmet in his hand.
  The casque, enraged, amidst the Greeks he threw;
  The Greeks with smiles the polish'd trophy view.
  Then, as once more he lifts the deadly dart,
  In thirst of vengeance, at his rival's heart;
  The queen of love her favour'd champion shrouds
  (For gods can all things) in a veil of clouds.
  Raised from the field the panting youth she led,
  And gently laid him on the bridal bed,
  With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews,
  And all theght:
  Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskill'd
  Shouldst fall an easy conquest on the field."

  The prince replies: "Ah cease, divinely fair,
  Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear;
  This day the foe prevail'd by Pallas' power:
  We yet may vanquish in a happier hour:
  There want not gods to favour us above;
  But let the business of our life be love:
  These softer moments let delights employ,
  And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy.
  Not thus I loved thee, when from Sparta's shore
  My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore,
  When first entranced in Cranae's isle I lay,(124)
  Mix'd with thy soul, and all dissolved away!"
  Thus having spoke, the enamour'd Phrygian boy
  Rush'd to the bed, impatient for the joy.
  Him Helen follow'd slow with bashful charms,
  And clasp'd the blooming hero in her arms.

  While these to love's delicious rapture yield,
  The stern Atrides rages round the field:
  So some fell lion whom the woods obey,
  Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.
  Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy,
  But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy;
  Even those had yielded to a foe so brave
  The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.
  Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose,
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!
  Hear and attest! from Heaven with conquest crown'd,
  Our brother's arms the just success have found:
  Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restor'd,
  Let Argive Helen own her lawful lord;
  The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
  And age to age record this signal day."

  He ceased; his army's loud applauses rise,
  And the long shout runs echoing through the skies.

                          [Illustration: VENUS.]

                                  VENUS.


             [Illustration: Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".]

                     Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".





BOOK IV.


ARGUMENT.

THE BREACH OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST BATTLE.

The gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agree upon
tommands
  To raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands;
  Their sudden friendship by her arts may cease,
  And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace."

  The sire of men and monarch of the sky
  The advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,
  Dissolve the league, and all her arts employ
  To make the breach the faithless act of Troy.
  Fired with the charge, she headlong urged her bended horns,
  And beaten gold each taper point adorns.
  This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior bends,
  Screen'd by the shields of his surrounding friends:
  There meditates the mark; and couching low,
  Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.
  One from a hundred feather'd deaths he chose,
  Fated to wound, and cause of future woes;
  Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown
  Apollo's altars in his native town.

  Now with full force the yielding horn he bends,
  Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends;
  Close to his breast he strains the nerve below,
  Till the barb'd points approach the circling bow;
  The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;
  Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.

  But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour
  The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power,
  Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force)
  Diverts the weapon from its destined course:
  So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye,
  The watchful mother wafts the envenom'd fly.
  Just where his belt with golden buckerced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow,
  A grief to us, a triumph to the foe."

  The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man
  Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.
  The dauntless king yet standing firm he found,
  And all the chiefs in deep concern around.
  Where to the steely point the reed was join'd,
  The shaft he drew, but left the head behind.
  Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced,
  He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced;
  Then suck'd the blood, and sovereign balm infused,(133)
  Which Chiron gave, and Ä†sculapius used.

  While round the prince the Greeks employ their care,
  The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war;
  Once more they glitter in refulgent arms,
  Once more the fields are fill'd with dire alarms.
  Nor had you seen the king of men appear
  Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear;
  But fond of glory, with severe delight,
  His beating bosom claim'd the rising fight.
  No longer with his warlike steeds he stay'd,
  Or press'd the car with polish'd brass inlaid
  But left Eurymedon the reins to guide;
  The fiery coursers snorted at his side.
  On foot through all the martial ranks he moves
  And these encourages, and those reproves.
  "Brave men!" he cries, (to such who boldly dare
  Urge their swift steeds to face the coming war),
  "Your ancient valour on the foes approve;
  Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove.
  'Tis not for us, but guilty Troy, to dread,
  Whose crimes sit heavy on her perjured head;
  Her sons and matrons Greece shall lead in chains,
  And her dead warriors strew the mournful plains."

  Thus with new ardour he the brave inspires;
  Or thus the fearful with reproaches fires:
  "Shame to your country, scandal of your kind;
  Born to the fate ye well deserve to find!
  Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain,
  Prepared for flight, but doom'd to fly in vain?
  Confused and panting thus, the hunted deer
  Falls as he flies, a victim to his fear.
  Still must ye wait the foes, and still retire,
  Till yon tall rms a mighty name)
  Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry,
  With hands unactive, and a careless eye?
  Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fear'd;
  Still first in front the matchless prince appear'd:
  What glorious toils, what wonders they recite,
  Who view'd him labouring through the ranks of fight?
  I saw him once, when gathering martial powers,
  A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenae's towers;
  Armies he ask'd, and armies had been given,
  Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven;
  While dreadful comets glaring from afar,
  Forewarn'd the horrors of the Theban war.(136)
  Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,
  A fearless envoy, he approach'd the foes;
  Thebes' hostile walls unguarded and alone,
  Dauntless he enters, and demands the throne.
  The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found,
  And dared to combat all those chiefs around:
  Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord;
  For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword.
  Stung with the shame, within the winding way,
  To bar his passage fifty warriors lay;
  Two heroes led the secret squadron on,
  Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;
  Those fifty slaughter'd in the gloomy vale.
  He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale,
  Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire;
  Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!"

  No words the godlike Diomed return'd,
  But heard respectful, and in secret burn'd:
  Not so fierce Capaneus' undaunted son;
  Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun:

  "What needs, O monarch! this invidious praise,
  Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
  Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess
  Our value equal, though our fury less.
  With fewer troops we storm'd the Theban wall,
  And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,(137)
  In impious acts the guilty father died;
  The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
  Far more than heirs of all our parents' fame,
  Our glories darken their diminish'd name."

  To him Tydides thus: "My friend, forbear;
  Suppress thy passion,  rest tumultuous fled;
  The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead:
  But Phoebus now from Ilion's towering height
  Shines forth reveal'd, and animates the fight.
  "Trojans, be bold, and force with force oppose;
  Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!
  Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribb'd with steel;
  Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel.
  Have ye forgot what seem'd your dread before?
  The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more."

  Apollo thus from Ilion's lofty towers,
  Array'd in terrors, roused the Trojan powers:
  While war's fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe,
  And shouts and thunders in the fields below.
  Then great Diores fell, by doom divine,
  In vain his valour and illustrious line.
  A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw,
  (Who from cold Ä†nus led the Thracian crew,)(142)
  Full on his ankle dropp'd the ponderous stone,
  Burst the strong nerves, and crash'd the solid bone.
  Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands,
  Before his helpless friends, and native bands,
  And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.
  The foe rush'd furious as he pants for breath,
  And through his navel drove the pointed death:
  His  steeds and chariot, to the navy led,
  Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed.

  Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,
  Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view;
  When by the blood-stain'd hand Minerva press'd
  The god of battles, and this speech address'd:

  "Stern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,
  Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
  Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide;
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
  While we from interdicted fields retire,
  Nor tempt the wrath of heaven's avenging sire."

  Her words allay the impetuous warrior's heat,
  The god of arms and martial maid retreat;
  Removed from fight, on Xanthus' flowery bounds
  They sat, and listen'd to the dying sounds.

  Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,
  And some bold chieftain every leader slew:
  First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,
  His death ennobled by Atrides' hand:

  As he to flight his wheeling car address'd,
  The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
  In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,
  His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.

  Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! doom'd to feel
  The great Idomeneus' protended steel;
  Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)
  From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
  The Cretan javelin reach'd him from afar,
  And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car;
  Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,
  And everlasting shades his eyes surround.

  Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase,
  In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;
  Diana taught him all her sylvan arts,
  To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:
  But vainly here Diana's arts he tries,
  The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;
  From Menelaus' arm the weapon sent,
  Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Next artful Phereclus untimely fell;
  Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
  Thy father's skill, O Phereclus! was thih a furious bound,
  Bends their strong necks, and tears them to the ground:
  So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn,
  Their steeds and chariot to the navy borne.

  With deep concern divine Ä†neas view'd
  The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued;
  Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies,
  Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
  At length he found Lycaon's mighty son;
  To whom the chief of Venus' race begun:

  "Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours now,
  Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,
  Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall'd fame,
  And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
  O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call
  That wondrous force by which whole armies fall;
  Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies
  To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;
  (Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
  For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
  Whoe'er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer;
  If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare."

  To him the Lycian: "Whom your eyes behold,
  If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:
  Such coursers whirl him o'er the dusty field,
  So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
  If 'tis a god, he wears that chief's disguise:
  Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies,
  Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,
  And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
  I wing'd an arrow, which not idly fell,
  The stroke had fix'd him to the gates of hell;
  And, but some god, some angry god withstands,
  His fate was due to these unerring hands.
  Skill'd in the bow, on foot I sought the war,
  Nor join'd swift horses to the rapid car.
  Ten polish'd chariots I possess'd at home,
  And still they grace Lycaon's princely dome:
  There veil'd in spacious coverlets they stand;
  And twice ten coursers wait their lord's command.
  The good old warrior bade me trust to these,
  When first for Troy I sail'd the sacred seas;
  In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,
  And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
  But vain with youth, and yet ter the fall'n trunk his ample shield display'd,
  He hides the hero with his mighty shade,
  And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes
  Behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
  Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields
  Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:(147)
  He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,
  Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
  Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,
  Full on the bone the pointed marble lights;
  Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,
  And stripp'd the skin, and crack'd the solid bone.
  Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains,
  His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;
  Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies;
  A sudden cloud comes swimming o'er his eyes.
  There the brave chief, who mighty numbers sway'd,
  Oppress'd had sunk to death's eternal shade,
  But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love
  She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,
  His danger views with anguish and despair,
  And guards her offspring with a mother's care.
  About her much-loved son her arms she throws,
  Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
  Screen'd from the foe behind her shining veil,
  The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail;
  Safe through the rushing horse, and feather'd flight
  Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.

  Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands,
  Remain'd unheedful of his lord's commands:
  His panting steeds, removed from out the war,
  He fix'd with straiten'd traces to the car,
  Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains
  The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes:
  These in proud triumph to the fleet convey'd,
  No longer now a Trojaentrance in his iron breast;
  To Jove's high palace for a cure he fled,
  Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;
  Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around,
  Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
  Rash, impious man! to stain the bless'd abodes,
  And drench his arrows in the blood of gods!

         [Illustration: OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.]

                 OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.


  "But thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic deed),
  Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed,
  Know thou, whoe'er with heavenly power contends,
  Short is his date, and soon his glory ends;
  From fields of death when late he shall retire,
  No infant on hiso Troy's high fane, and to his holy place;
  Latona there and Phoebe heal'd the wound,
  With vigour arm'd him, and with glory crown'd.
  This done, the patron of the silver bow
  A phantom raised, the same in shape and show
  With great Ä†neas; such the form he bore,
  And such in fight the radiant arms he wore.
  Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,
  And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
  Meantime on Ilion's tower Apollo stood,
  And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god:

  "Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;
  Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,
  Rise in thy wrath! to hell's abhorr'd abodes
  Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.
  First rosy Venus felt his brutal rage;
  Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage:
  The wretch would brave high heaven's immortal sire,
  His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire."

  The god of battle issues on the plain,
  Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan train;
  In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide,
  Enraged to Troy's retiring chiefs he cried:

  "How long, ye sons of Priam! w
  And great Ulysses, bathed in hostile blood.
  Embodied close, the labouring Grecian train
  The fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.
  Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait
  Serenely dreadful, and as fix'd as fate.
  So when the embattled clouds in dark array,
  Along the skies their gloomy lines display;
  When now the North his boisterous rage has spent,
  And peaceful sleeps the liquid element:
  The low-hung vapours, motionless and still,
  Rest on the summits of the shaded hill;
  Till the mass scatters as the winds arise,
  Dispersed and broken through the ruffled skies.

  Nor was the general wanting to his train;
  From troop to troop he toils through all the plain,
  "Ye Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear;
  Your brave associates and yourselves revere!
  Let glorious acts more glorious acts inspire,
  And catch from breast to breast the noble fire!
  On valour's side the odds of combat lie,
  The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
  The wretch who trembles in the field of fame,
  Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame!"

  These words he seconds with his flying lance,
  To meet whose point was strong Deicoon's chance:
  Ä†neas' friend, and in his native place
  Honour'd and loved like Priam's royal race:
  Long had he fought the foremost in the field,
  But now the monarch's lance transpierced his shield:
  His shield too weak the furious dart to stay,
  Through his broad belt the weapon forced its way:
  The grisly wound dismiss'd his soul to hell,
  His arms around him rattled as he fell.

  Then fierce Ä†neas, brandishing his blade,
  In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid,
  Whose sire Diocleus, wealthy, brave and great,
  In well-built Pherae held his lofty seat:(152)
  Sprung from Alpheus' plenteous stream, that yields
  Increase of harvests to the Pylian fields.
  He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he,
  And these descended in the third degree.
  Too early expert in the martial toil,
  In sable ships they left their native soil,
  To avenge Atrides: now, untimeise my glory when thy own is lost:
  Now meet thy fate, and by Sarpedon slain,
  Add one more ghost to Pluto's gloomy reign."

  He said: both javelins at an instant flew;
  Both struck, both wounded, but Sarpedon's slew:
  Full in the boaster's neck the weapon stood,
  Transfix'd his throat, and drank the vital blood;
  The soul disdainful seeks the caves of night,
  And his seal'd eyes for ever lose the light.

  Yet not in vain, Tlepolemus, was thrown
  Thy angry lance; which piercing to the bone
  Sarpedon's thigh, had robb'd the chief of breath;
  But Jove was present, and forbade the death.
  Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng,
  The wounded hero dragg'd the lance along.
  (His friends, each busied in his several part,
  Through haste, or danger, had not drawn the dart.)
  The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired;
  Whose fall Ulysses view'd, with fury fired;
  Doubtful if Jove's great son he should pursue,
  Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew.
  But heaven and fate the first design withstand,
  Nor this great death must grace Ulysses' hand.
  Minerva drives him on the Lycian train;
  Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strew'd the plain,
  Alcander, Prytanis, Noemon fell:(154)
  And numbers more his sword had sent to hell,
  But Hector saw; and, furious at the sight,
  Rush'd terrible amidst the ranks of fight.
  With joy Sarpedon view'd the wish'd relief,
  And, faint, lamenting, thus implored the chief:

  "O suffer not the foe to bear away
  My helpless corpse, an unassisted prey;
  If I, unbless'd, must see my son no more,
  My much-loved consort, and my native shore,
  Yet let me die in Ilion's sacred wall;
  Troy, in whose cause I fell, shall mourn my fall."

  He said, nor Hector to the chief replies,
  But shakes his plume, and fierce to combat flies;
  Swift as a whirlwind, drives the scattering foes;
  And dyes the ground with purple as he goes.

  Beneath a beech, Jove's consecrated shade,
  His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid:
  Brave Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nioy now they reach'd and touch'd those banks divine,
  Where silver Simois and Scamander join
  There Juno stopp'd, and (her fair steeds unloosed)
  Of air condensed a vapour circumfused
  For these, impregnate with celestial dew,
  On Simois, brink ambrosial herbage grew.
  Thence to relieve the fainting Argive throng,
  Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.

  The best and bravest of the Grecian band
  (A warlike circle) round Tydides stand.
  Such was their look as lions bathed in blood,
  Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood
  Heaven's empress mingles with the mortal crowd,
  And shouts, in Stentor's sounding voice, aloud;
  Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,(158)
  Whose throats surpass'd the force of fifty tongues.

  "Inglorious Argives! to your race a shame,
  And only men in figure and in name!
  Once from the walls your timorous foes engaged,
  While fierce in war divine Achilles raged;
  Now issuing fearless they possess the plain,
  Now win the shores, and scarce the seas remain."

  Her speech new fury to their hearts convey'd;
  While near Tydides stood the Athenian maid;
  The king beside his panting steeds she found,
  O'erspent with toil reposing on the ground;
  To cool his glowing wound he sat apart,
  (The wound inflicted by the Lycian dart.)
  Large drops of sweat from all his limbs descend,
  Beneath his ponderous shield his sinews bend,
  Whose ample belt, that o'er his shoulder lay,
  He eased; and wash'd the clotted gore away.
  The goddess leaning o'er the bending yoke,
  Beside his coursers, thus her silence broke:

  "Degenerate prince! and not of Tydeus' kind,
  Whose little body lodged a mighty mind;
  Foremost he press'd in glorious toils to share,
  And scarce refrain'd when I forbade the war.
  Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go,
  And feast, incircled by the Theban foe;
  There braved, and vanquish'd, many a hardy knight;
  Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight.
  Thou too no less hast been my constant care;
  Thy hands I arm'd, and And heal'd the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.
  As when the fig's press'd juice, infused in cream,
  To curds coagulates the liquid stream,
  Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined;
  Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture join'd.
  Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dress'd
  His mighty limbs in an immortal vest.
  Glorious he sat, in majesty restored,
  Fast by the throne of heaven's superior lord.
  Juno and Pallas mount the bless'd abodes,
  Their task perform'd, and mix among the gods.

                          [Illustration: JUNO.]

                                  JUNO.





BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.

THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.

The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, the chief
augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to appoint
a solemn procession of the queen and the Trojan matrons to the temple of
Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight. The battle
relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have an
interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge, of the
friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors, they make
exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders of Helenus,
prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking a tender leave of
his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field.

The scene is first in the field of battle, between the rivers Simois and
Scamander, and then changes to Troy.

  Now heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yield
  To human force and human skill the field:
  Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes;
  Now here, now there, the tide of combat flows;
  While Troy's famed streams, that bound the deathful plain
  On either side, run purple to the main.

  Great Ajax first to conqht."

  Hector obedient heard: and, with a bound,
  Leap'd from his trembling chariot to the ground;
  Through all his host inspiring force he flies,
  And bids the thunder of the battle rise.
  With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow,
  And turn the tide of conflict on the foe:
  Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling spears;
  All Greece recedes, and 'midst her triumphs fears;
  Some god, they thought, who ruled the fate of wars,
  Shot down avenging from the vault of stars.

  Then thus aloud: "Ye dauntless Dardans, hear!
  And you whom distant nations send to war!
  Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore;
  Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more.
  One hour demands me in the Trojan wall,
  To bid our altars flame, and victims fall:
  Nor shall, I trust, the matrons' holy train,
  And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain."

  This said, with ample strides the hero pass'd;
  The shield's large orb behind his shoulder cast,
  His neck o'ershading, to his ankle hung;
  And as he march'd the brazen buckler rung.

  Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),(167)
  Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeus' son
  Between both armies met: the chiefs from far
  Observed each other, and had mark'd for war.
  Near as they drew, Tydides thus began:

  "What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
  Our eyes till now that aspect ne'er beheld,
  Where fame is reap'd amid the embattled field;
  Yet far before the troops thou dar'st appear,
  And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear.
  Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires,
  Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires!
  But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend,
  Know with immortals we no more contend.
  Not long Lycurgus view'd the golden light,
  That daring man who mix'd with gods in fight.
  Bacchus, and Bacchus' votaries, he drove,
  With brandish'd steel, from Nyssa's sacred grove:
  Their consecrated spears lay scatter'd round,
  With curling vines and twisted ivy bound;
  While Bacchus headlong sought the briny flood,
  And Thetis' arm yon ample field;
  Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;
  But thou and Diomed be foes no more.
  Now change we arms, and prove to either host
  We guard the friendship of the line we boast."

  Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,
  Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight;
  Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resign'd,
  (Jove warm'd his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)
  For Diomed's brass arms, of mean device,
  For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)
  He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,(171)
  A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.

  Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Great Hector, enter'd at the Scaean gate.(172)
  Beneath the beech-tree's consecrated shades,
  The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids
  Around him flock'd, all press'd with pious care
  For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war.
  He bids the train in long procession go,
  And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe.
  And now to Priam's stately courts he came,
  Rais'd on arch'd columns of stupendous frame;
  O'er these a range of marble structure runs,
  The rich pavilions of his fifty sons,
  In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,(173)
  Opposed to those, where Priam's daughters sate.
  Twelve domes for them and their loved spouses shone,
  Of equal beauty, and of polish'd stone.
  Hither great Hector pass'd, nor pass'd unseen
  Of royal Hecuba, his mother-queen.
  (With her Laodice, whose beauteous face
  Surpass'd the nymphs of Troy's illustrious race.)
  Long in a strict embrace she held her son,
  And press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "O Hector! say, what great occasion calls
  My son from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls;
  Com'st thou to supplicate the almighty power
  With lifted hands, from Ilion's lofty tower?
  Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crown'd,
  In Jove's high name, to sprinkle on the ground,
  And pay due vows to's on fire.
  Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls,
  And timely join me, ere I leave the walls.
  Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray,
  My wife, my infant, claim a moment's stay;
  This day (perhaps the last that sees me here)
  Demands a parting word, a tender tear:
  This day, some god who hates our Trojan land
  May vanquish Hector by a Grecian hand."

  He said, and pass'd with sad presaging heart
  To seek his spouse, his soul's far dearer part;
  At home he sought her, but he sought in vain;
  She, with one maid of all her menial train,
  Had hence retired; and with her second joy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
  Pensive she stood on Ilion's towery height,
  Beheld the war, and sicken'd at the sight;
  There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
  Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.

  But he who found not whom his soul desired,
  Whose virtue charm'd him as her beauty fired,
  Stood in the gates, and ask'd "what way she bent
  Her parting step? If to the fane she went,
  Where late the mourning matrons made resort;
  Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?"
  "Not to the court, (replied the attendant train,)
  Nor mix'd with matrons to Minerva's fane:
  To Ilion's steepy tower she bent her way,
  To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
  Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword;
  She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:
  Distracted with surprise, she seem'd to fly,
  Fear on her cheek, and sorrow m her eye.
  The nurse attended with her infant boy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy."

  Hector this heard, return'd without delay;
  Swift through the town he trod his former way,
  Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;
  And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
  With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
  His blameless wife, Aetion's wealthy heir:
  (Cilician Thebe great Aetion sway'd,
  And Hippoplacus' wide extended shade:)
  The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press'd,
  His only hope hung smiling at her breast,
  Whom l's far better part,
  Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
  No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
  Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
  Fix'd is the term to all the race of earth;
  And such the hard condition of our birth:
  No force can then resist, no flight can save,
  All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
  No more--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
  There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
  Me glory summons to the martial scene,
  The field of combat is the sphere for men.
  Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
  The first in danger as the first in fame."

  Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
  His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
  His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
  Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye
  That stream'd at every look; then, moving slow,
  Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
  There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
  Through all her train the soft infection ran;
  The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
  And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.

  But now, no longer deaf to honour's call,
  Forth issues Paris from the palace wall.
  In brazen arms that cast a gleamy ray,
  Swift through the town the warrior bends his way.
  The wanton courser thus with reins unbound(176)
  Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground;
  Pamper'd and proud, he seeks the wonted tides,
  And laves, in height of blood his shining sides;
  His head now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies;
  He snuffs the females in the distant plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
  With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay,
  In arms refulgent as the god of day,
  The son of Priam, glorying in his might,
  Rush'd forth with Hector to the fields of fight.

  And now, the warriors passing on the way,
  The graceful Paris first excused his stay.
  To whom the noble Hector thus replied:
  "O chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied!
  Thy power in war with just the listed plain.
  For not this day shall end thy glorious date;
  The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate."

  He said: the warrwar,'
  The stone shall tell your vanquish'd hero's name.
  And distant ages learn the victor's fame."

  This fierce defiance Greece astonish'd heard,
  Blush'd to refuse, and to accept it fear'd.
  Stern Menelaus first the silence broke,
  And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke:

  "Women of Greece! O scandal of your race,
  Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace,
  How great the shame, when every age shall know
  That not a Grecian met this noble foe!
  Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew,
  A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
  Be what ye seem, unanimated clay,
  Myself will dare the danger of the day;
  'Tis man's bold task the generous strife to try,
  But in the hands of God is victory."

  These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
  His manly limbs in azure arms he dress'd.
  That day, Atrides! a superior hand
  Had stretch'd thee breathless on the hostile strand;
  But all at once, thy fury to compose,
  The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose;
  Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, press'd
  Thy daring hand, and this advice address'd:
  "Whither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run,
  And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
  Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design;
  Great Hectors arm is mightier far than thine:
  Even fierce Achilles learn'd its force to fear,
  And trembling met this dreadful son of war.
  Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band;
  Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand.
  The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name,
  Though bold and burning with desire of fame,
  Content the doubtful honour might forego,
  So great the danger, and so brave the foe."

  He said, and turn'd his brother's vengeful mind;
  He stoop'd to reason, and his rage resign'd,
  No longer bent to rush on certain harms;
  His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.

  He from whose lips divine persuasion flows,
  Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;
  Thus to the kings he spoke: "What grief, what shame
  Attend on Greece, and all the Gre was its orb, with seven thick folds o'ercast,
  Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last,
  (The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwell'd
  And in all arts of armoury excell'd,)
  This Ajax bore before his manly breast,
  And, threatening, thus his adverse chief address'd:

  "Hector! approach my arm, and singly know
  What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
  Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are,
  Not void of soul, and not unskill'd in war:
  Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore,
  Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;
  Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
  And sends thee one, a sample of her host,
  Such as I am, I come to prove thy might;
  No more--be sudden, and begin the fight."

  "O son of Telamon, thy country's pride!
  (To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)
  Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,
  New to the field, and trembling at the fight?
  Thou meet'st a chief deserving of thy arms,
  To combat born, and bred amidst alarms:
  I know to shift my ground, remount the car,
  Turn, charge, and answer every call of war;
  To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,
  And bear thick battle on my sounding shield
  But open be our fight, and bold each blow;
  I steal no conquest from a noble foe."

  He said, and rising, high above the field
  Whirl'd the long lance against the sevenfold shield.
  Full on the brass descending from above
  Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,
  Till in the seventh it fix'd. Then Ajax threw;
  Through Hector's shield the forceful javelin flew,
  His corslet enters, and his garment rends,
  And glancing downwards, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low
  Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
  From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins drew,
  Then close impetuous, and the charge renew;
  Fierce as the mountain-lions bathed in blood,
  Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.
  At Ajax, Hector his long lance extends;
  The blunted point against the bucke raised;
  Next, to secure our camp and naval powers,
  Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers;
  From space to space be ample gates around,
  For passing chariots; and a trench profound.
  So Greece to combat shall in safety go,
  Nor fear the fierce incursions of the foe."
  'Twas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved;
  The sceptred kings of Greece his words approved.

  Meanwhile, convened at Priam's palace-gate,
  The Trojan peers in nightly council sate;
  A senate void of order, as of choice:
  Their hearts were fearful, and confused their voice.
  Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear:
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear!
  'Tis heaven the counsel of my breast inspires,
  And I but move what every god requires:
  Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,
  And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
  The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke,
  Our impious battles the just gods provoke.
  As this advice ye practise, or reject,
  So hope success, or dread the dire effect."

  The senior spoke and sate. To whom replied
  The graceful husband of the Spartan bride:
  "Cold counsels, Trojan, may become thy years
  But sound ungrateful in a warrior's ears:
  Old man, if void of fallacy or art,
  Thy words express the purpose of thy heart,
  Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given;
  But wisdom has its date, assign'd by heaven.
  Then hear me, princes of the Trojan name!
  Their treasures I'll restore, but not the dame;
  My treasures too, for peace, I will resign;
  But be this bright possession ever mine."

  'Twas then, the growing discord to compose,
  Slow from his seat the reverend Priam rose:
  His godlike aspect deep attention drew:
  He paused, and these pacific words ensue:

  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar bands!
  Now take refreshment as the hour demands;
  Guard well the walls, relieve the watch of night.
  Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.
  Then shall our herald, to the Atrides sent,
  Before their ships proclaim my son's intent.
  Next lett of our realms above?
  Where'er the sun's refulgent rays are cast,
  Thy power is honour'd, and thy fame shall last.
  But yon proud work no future age shall view,
  No trace remain where once the glory grew.
  The sapp'd foundations by thy force shall fall,
  And, whelm'd beneath the waves, drop the huge wall:
  Vast drifts of sand shall change the former shore:
  The ruin vanish'd, and the name no more."

  Thus they in heaven: while, o'er the Grecian train,
  The rolling sun descending to the main
  Beheld the finish'd work. Their bulls they slew;
  Back from the tents the savoury vapour flew.
  And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnos' strands,
  With Bacchus' blessings cheered the generous bands.
  Of fragrant wines the rich Eunaeus sent
  A thousant measures to the royal tent.
  (Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle of yore
  To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,)
  The rest they purchased at their proper cost,
  And well the plenteous freight supplied the host:
  Each, in exchange, proportion'd treasures gave;(188)
  Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.
  All night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers:
  Those on the fields, and these within their towers.
  But Jove averse the signs of wrath display'd,
  And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade:
  Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all,
  While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.
  Each pour'd to Jove before the bowl was crown'd;
  And large libations drench'd the thirsty ground:
  Then late, refresh'd with sleep from toils of fight,
  Enjoy'd the balmy blessings of the night.

               [Illustration: GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.]

                       GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.





BOOK VIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THEcking armies closed,
  To lances lances, shields to shields opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy legends drew,
  The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;
  Victors and vanquish'd join promiscuous cries,
  Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.
  Long as the morning beams, increasing bright,
  O'er heaven's clear azure spread the sacred light,
  Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
  Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
  But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
  The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,(192)
  With equal hand: in these explored the fate
  Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight:
  Press'd with its load, the Grecian balance lies
  Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.
  Then Jove from Ida's top his horrors spreads;
  The clouds burst dreadful o'er the Grecian heads;
  Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls;
  Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls.
  Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire;
  The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire.
  Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear,
  Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war:
  Nor he, the king of war, the alarm sustain'd
  Nestor alone, amidst the storm remain'd.
  Unwilling he remain'd, for Paris' dart
  Had pierced his courser in a mortal part;
  Fix'd in the forehead, where the springing man
  Curl'd o'er the brow, it stung him to the brain;
  Mad with his anguish, he begins to rear,
  Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air.
  Scarce had his falchion cut the reins, and freed
  The encumber'd chariot from the dying steed,
  When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war,
  Pour'd to the tumult on his whirling car.
  That day had stretch'd beneath his matchless hand
  The hoary monarch of the Pylian band,
  But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowd
  He rush'd, and on Ulysses call'd aloud:

  "Whither, oh whither does Ulysses run?
  Oh, flight unworthymy Thunderer might repine:
  Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend,
  And see his Trojans to the shades descend:
  Such be the scene from his Idaean bower;
  Ungrateful prospect to the sullen power!"

  Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design:
  "What rage, what madness, furious queen! is thine?
  I war not with the highest. All above
  Submit and tremble at the hand of Jove."

  Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless might
  Jove gave the glory of the destined fight,
  Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills the fields
  With close-ranged chariots, and with thicken'd shields.
  Where the deep trench in length extended lay,
  Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array,
  A dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threat
  With long-destroying flames the hostile fleet.
  The king of men, by Juno's self inspired,
  Toil'd through the tents, and all his army fired.
  Swift as he moved, he lifted in his hand
  His purple robe, bright ensign of command.
  High on the midmost bark the king appear'd:
  There, from Ulysses' deck, his voice was heard:
  To Ajax and Achilles reach'd the sound,
  Whose distant ships the guarded navy bound.
  "O Argives! shame of human race! (he cried:
  The hollow vessels to his voice replied,)
  Where now are all your glorious boasts of yore,
  Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore?
  Each fearless hero dares a hundred foes,
  While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows;
  But who to meet one martial man is found,
  When the fight rages, and the flames surround?
  O mighty Jove! O sire of the distress'd!
  Was ever king like me, like me oppress'd?
  With power immense, with justice arm'd in vain;
  My glory ravish'd, and my people slain!
  To thee my vows were breathed from every shore;
  What altar smoked not with our victims' gore?
  With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame,
  And ask'd destruction to the Trojan name.
  Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand;
  Give these at least to 'scape from Hector's hand,
  And save the relics of the Greciaur care,
  Condemn'd to suffer the full force of fate,
  And drain the dregs of heaven's relentless hate?
  Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all?
  What numbers fell! what numbers yet shall fall!
  What power divine shall Hector's wrath assuage?
  Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!"

  So spake the imperial regent of the skies;
  To whom the goddess with the azure eyes:

  "Long since had Hector stain'd these fields with gore,
  Stretch'd by some Argive on his native shore:
  But he above, the sire of heaven, withstands,
  Mocks our attempts, and slights our just demands;
  The stubborn god, inflexible and hard,
  Forgets my service and deserved reward:
  Saved I, for this, his favourite son distress'd,
  By stern Eurystheus with long labours press'd?
  He begg'd, with tears he begg'd, in deep dismay;
  I shot from heaven, and gave his arm the day.
  Oh had my wisdom known this dire event,
  When to grim Pluto's gloomy gates he went;
  The triple dog had never felt his chain,
  Nor Styx been cross'd, nor hell explored in vain.
  Averse to me of all his heaven of gods,
  At Thetis' suit the partial Thunderer nods;
  To grace her gloomy, fierce, resenting son,
  My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone.
  Some future day, perhaps, he may be moved
  To call his blue-eyed maid his best beloved.
  Haste, launch thy chariot, through yon ranks to ride;
  Myself will arm, and thunder at thy side.
  Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then?
  (That terror of the Greeks, that man of men)
  When Juno's self, and Pallas shall appear,
  All dreadful in the crimson walks of war!
  What mighty Trojan then, on yonder shore,
  Expiring, pale, and terrible no more,
  Shall feast the fowls, and glut the dogs with gore?"

  She ceased, and Juno rein'd the steeds with care:
  (Heaven's awful empress, Saturn's other heir:)
  Pallas, meanwhile, her various veil unbound,
  With flowers adorn'd, with art immortal crown'd;
  The radiant robe her sacred fingers wove
  Floats in rich waves, and sp
  For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;
  What power soe'er provokes our lifted hand,
  On this our hill no more shall hold his place;
  Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race."

  Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom,
  But feast their souls on Ilion's woes to come.
  Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
  The prudent goddess yet her wrath repress'd;
  But Juno, impotent of rage, replies:
  "What hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!
  Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne;
  'Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.
  For Greece we grieve, abandon'd by her fate
  To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate.
  From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
  With arms unaiding see our Argives slain;
  Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move,
  Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove."

  The goddess thus; and thus the god replies,
  Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies:

  "The morning sun, awaked by loud alarms,
  Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms.
  What heaps of Argives then shall load the plain,
  Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain.
  Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight,
  The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight,
  Even till the day when certain fates ordain
  That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain)
  Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.
  For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its course
  With all thy rage, with all thy rebel force.
  Fly, if thy wilt, to earth's remotest bound,
  Where on her utmost verge the seas resound;
  Where cursed Iapetus and Saturn dwell,
  Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell;
  No sun e'er gilds the gloomy horrors there;
  No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air:
  There arm once more the bold Titanian band;
  And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand."

  Now deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light,
  And drew behind the cloudy veil of night:
  The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decay'd;
  The Greeks rejoicing bless the friendly shade.

  The victors klles, in order to
move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice of,rmies humbles to the dust.
  Haste then, for ever quit these fatal fields,
  Haste to the joys our native country yields;
  Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy."

  He said: deep silence held the Grecian band;
  Silent, unmov'd in dire dismay they stand;
  A pensive scene! till Tydeus' warlike son
  Roll'd on the king his eyes, and thus begun:
  "When kings advise us to renounce our fame,
  First let him speak who first has suffer'd shame.
  If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold,
  The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
  Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight,
  Durst brand my courage, and defame my might:
  Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appear'd,
  The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard.
  The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring,
  The gods have made thee but by halves a king:
  They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command;
  They gave dominion o'er the seas and land;
  The noblest power that might the world control
  They gave thee not--a brave and virtuous soul.
  Is this a general's voice, that would suggest
  Fears like his own to every Grecian breast?
  Confiding in our want of worth, he stands;
  And if we fly, 'tis whahstood,
  And ratify the best for public good.
  Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine,
  But follow it, and make the wisdom thine.
  Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste,
  At once my present judgment and my past.
  When from Pelides' tent you forced the maid,
  I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;
  But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired,
  You wronged the man, by men and gods admired:
  Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,
  With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend."

  To whom the king. "With justice hast thou shown
  A prince's faults, and I with reason own.
  That happy man, whom Jove still honours most,
  Is more than armies, and himself a host.
  Bless'd in his love, this wondrous hero stands;
  Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.
  Fain would my heart, which err'd through frantic rage,
  The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.
  If gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,(201)
  Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow.
  Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
  And twice ten vases of refulgent mould:
  Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
  Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
  Twelve steeds unmatch'd in fleetness and in force,
  And still victorious in the dusty course;
  (Rich were the man whose ample stores exceed
  The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
  Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
  Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
  The same I chose for more than vulgar charms,
  When Lesbos sank beneath the hero's arms:
  All these, to buy his friendship, shall be paid,
  And join'd with these the long-contested maid;
  With all her charms, Briseis I resign,
  And solemn swear those charms were never mine;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
  Pure from my arms, and guiltless of my loves,(202)
  These instant shall be his; and if the powers
  Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
  Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil divides)
  With gold and brass his loaded navy'outs their conquest they proclaim,
  And point at every ship their vengeful flame!
  For them the father of the gods declares,
  Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
  See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
  See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies;
  What fury in his breast, what yself shall chose; who yield to none,
  Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
  Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
  If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
  There shalt thou live his son, his honour share,
  And with Orestes' self divide his care.
  Yet more--three daughters in his court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed:
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair:
  Her shalt thou wed whom mon:
  Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
  Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
  My heart detests him as the gates of hell.

  "Then thus in short my fix'd resolves attend,
  Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;
  Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore,
  But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
  Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,
  The wretch and hero find their prize the same.
  Alike regretted in the dust he lies,
  Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
  Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
  A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
  As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
  From danger guards them, and from want defends;
  In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
  And with the untasted food supplies her care:
  For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
  Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;
  Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,
  And sweat laborious days in dust and blood.
  I sack'd twelve ample cities on the main,(207)
  And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain:
  Then at Atrides' haughty feet were laid
  The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
  Your mighty monarch these in peace possess'd;
  Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
  Some present, too, to every prince was paid;
  And every prince enjoys the gift he made:
  I only must refund, of all his train;
  See what pre-eminence our merits gain!
  My spoil alone his greedy soul delights:
  My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights:
  The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy;
  But what's the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?
  What to these shores the assembled nations draws,
  What calls for vengeance but a woman's cause?
  Are fair endowments and a beauteous face
  Beloved by none but those of Atreus' race?
  The wife whom choice and passion doth approve,
  Sure every wise and worthy man will love.
  Nor did my fair one less distinction claim;
  Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame.
  Wrong'd in my love, all proffers I disdain;
ix, stay behind?
  The royal Peleus, when from Pthia's coast
  He sent thee early to the Achaian host;
  Thy youth as then in sage debates unskill'd,
  And new to perils of the direful field:
  He bade me teach thee all the ways of war,
  To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.
  Never, ah, never let me leave thy side!
  No time shall part us, and no fate divide,
  Not though the god, that breathed my life, restore
  The bloom I boasted, and the port I bore,
  When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames
  (Delightful Greece, the land of lovely dames),
  My father faithless to my mother's arms,
  Old as he was, adored a stranger's charms.
  I tried what youth could do (at her desire)
  To win the damsel, and prevent my sire.
  My sire with curses loads my hated head,
  And cries, 'Ye furies! barren be his bed.'
  Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below,
  And ruthless Proserpine, confirm'd his vow.
  Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!
  Gods! what a crime my impious heart design'd!
  I thought (but some kind god that thought suppress'd)
  To plunge the poniard in my father's breast;
  Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain
  With prayers entreat me, and with force detain.
  On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine,
  They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine;
  Strong guards they placed, and watch'd nine nights entire;
  The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire.
  The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all:
  And, favour'd by the night, o'erleap'd the wall,
  My travels thence through spacious Greece extend;
  In Phthia's court at last my labours end.
  Your sire received me, as his son caress'd,
  With gifts enrich'd, and with possessions bless'd.
  The strong Dolopians thenceforth own'd my reign,
  And all the coast that runs along the main.
  By love to thee his bounties I repaid,
  And early wisdom to thy soul convey'd:
  Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave:
  A child I took thee, but a hero gave.
  Thy infant breast a like affection show'd;
  St Rest undetermined till the dawning day."

  He ceased; then order'd for the sage's bed
  A warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.
  With that, stern Ajax his long silence broke,
  And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke:

  "Hence let us go--why waste we time in vain?
  See what effect our low submissions gain!
  Liked or not liked, his words we must relate,
  The Greeks expect them, and our heroes wait.
  Proud as he is, that iron heart retains
  Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
  Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed,
  On just atonement, we remit the deed;
  A sire the slaughter of his son forgives;
  The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives:
  The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign,
  And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.(213)
  The gods that unrelenting breast have steel'd,
  And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.
  One woman-slave was ravish'd from thy arms:
  Lo, seven are offer'd, and of equal charms.
  Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind;
  Revere thy roof, and to thy guests be kind;
  And know the men of all the Grecian host,
  Who honour worth, and prize thy valour most."

  "O soul of battles, and thy people's guide!
  (To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied)
  Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyrant's name
  My rage rekindles, and my soul's on flame:
  'Tis just resentment, and becomes the brave:
  Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the vilest slave!
  Return, then, heroes! and our answer bear,
  The glorious combat is no more my care;
  Not till, amidst yon sinking navy slain,
  The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main;
  Not till the flames, by Hector's fury thrown,
  Consume your vessels, and approach my own;
  Just there, the impetuous homicide shall stand,
  There cease his battle, and there feel our hand."

  This said, each prince a double goblet crown'd,
  And cast a large libation on the ground;
  Then to their vessels, through t hours,
  To try yon camp, and watch the Trojan powers?
  But say, what hero shall sustain that task?
  Such bold exploits uncommon courage ask;
  Guideless, alone, through night's dark shade to go,
  And midst a hostile camp explore the foe."

  To whom the king: "In such distress we stand,
  No vulgar counsel our affairs demand;
  Greece to preserve, is now no easy part,
  But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art.
  For Jove, averse, our humble prayer denies,
  And bows his head to Hector's sacrifice.
  What eye has witness'd, or what ear believed,
  In one great day, by one great arm achieved,
  Such wondrous deeds as Hector's hand has done,
  And we beheld, the last revolving sun
  What honours the beloved of Jove adorn!
  Sprung from no god, and of no goddess born;
  Yet such his acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell,
  And curse the battle where their fathers fell.

  "Now speed thy hasty course along the fleet,
  There call great Ajax, and the prince of Crete;
  Ourself to hoary Nestor will repair;
  To keep the guards on duty be his care,
  (For Nestor's influence best that quarter guides,
  Whose son with Merion, o'er the watch presides.")
  To whom the Spartan: "These thy orders borne,
  Say, shall I stay, or with despatch return?"
  "There shall thou stay, (the king of men replied,)
  Else may we miss to meet, without a guide,
  The paths so many, and the camp so wide.
  Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers raise,
  Urge by their fathers' fame their future praise.
  Forget we now our state and lofty birth;
  Not titles here, but works, must prove our worth.
  To labour is the lot of man below;
  And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe."

  This said, each parted to his several cares:
  The king to Nestor's sable ship repairs;
  The sage protector of the Greeks he found
  Stretch'd in his bed with all his arms around
  The various-colour'd scarf, the shield he rears,
  The shining helmet, and the pointed spears;
  The dreadful weapons of the warrior's rage,
  That, old in arms, disdaze around,
  Watch every side, and turn to every sound.
  Thus watch'd the Grecians, cautious of surprise,
  Each voice, each motion, drew their ears and eyes:
  Each step of passing feet increased the affright;
  And hostile Troy was ever full in sight.
  Nestor with joy the wakeful band survey'd,
  And thus accosted through the gloomy shade.
  "'Tis well, my sons! your nightly cares employ;
  Else must our host become the scorn of Troy.
  Watch thus, and Greece shall live." The hero said;
  Then o'er the trench the following chieftains led.
  His son, and godlike Merion, march'd behind
  (For these the princes to their council join'd).
  The trenches pass'd, the assembled kings around
  In silent state the consistory crown'd.
  A place there was, yet undefiled with gore,
  The spot where Hector stopp'd his rage before;
  When night descending, from his vengeful hand
  Reprieved the relics of the Grecian band:
  (The plain beside with mangled corps was spread,
  And all his progress mark'd by heaps of dead:)
  There sat the mournful kings: when Neleus' son,
  The council opening, in these words begun:

  "Is there (said he) a chief so greatly brave,
  His life to hazard, and his country save?
  Lives there a man, who singly dares to go
  To yonder camp, or seize some straggling foe?
  Or favour'd by the night approach so near,
  Their speech, their counsels, and designs to hear?
  If to besiege our navies they prepare,
  Or Troy once more must be the seat of war?
  This could he learn, and to our peers recite,
  And pass unharm'd the dangers of the night;
  What fame were his through all succeeding days,
  While Phoebus shines, or men have tongues to praise!
  What gifts his grateful country would bestow!
  What must not Greece to her deliverer owe?
  A sable ewe each leader should provide,
  With each a sable lambkin by her side;
  At every rite his share should be increased,
  And his the foremost honours of the feast."

  Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear,
  Tydides spoke--"The man yourst exalt thy sceptre to the skies,
  And swear to grant me the demanded prize;
  The immortal coursers, and the glittering car,
  That bear Pelides through the ranks of war.
  Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go,
  Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know,
  Even to the royal tent pursue my way,
  And all their counsels, all their aims betray."

  The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high,
  Attesting thus the monarch of the sky:
  "Be witness thou! immortal lord of all!
  Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall:
  By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne,
  And him alone the immortal steeds adorn."

  Thus Hector swore: the gods were call'd in vain,
  But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain:
  Across his back the bended bow he flung,
  A wolf's grey hide around his shoulders hung,
  A ferret's downy fur his helmet lined,
  And in his hand a pointed javelin shined.
  Then (never to return) he sought the shore,
  And trod the path his feet must tread no more.
  Scarce had he pass'd the steeds and Trojan throng,
  (Still bending forward as he coursed along,)
  When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread
  Ulysses mark'd, and thus to Diomed;

  "O friend! I hear some step of hostile feet,
  Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet;
  Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main;
  Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.
  Yet let him pass, and win a little space;
  Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace.
  But if too swift of foot he flies before,
  Confine his course along the fleet and shore,
  Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ,
  And intercept his hoped return to Troy."

  With that they stepp'd aside, and stoop'd their head,
  (As Dolon pass'd,) behind a heap of dead:
  Along the path the spy unwary flew;
  Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue.
  So distant they, and such the space between,
  As when two teams of mules divide the green,
  (To whom the hind like shares of land allows,)
  When now new furrows part the approaching ploughs.
  Now Dolon, lie white steeds behind his chariot bound.
  The welcome sight Ulysses first descries,
  And points to Diomed the tempting prize.
  "The man, the coursers, and the car behold!
  Described by Dolon, with the arms of gold.
  Now, brave Tydides! now thy courage try,
  Approach the chariot, and the steeds untie;
  Or if thy soul aspire to fiercer deeds,
  Urge thou the slaughter, while I seize the steeds."

  Pallas (this said) her hero's bosom warms,
  Breathed in his heart, and strung his nervous arms;
  Where'er he pass'd, a purple stream pursued
  His thirsty falchion, fat with hostile blood,
  Bathed all his footsteps, dyed the fields with gore,
  And a low groan remurmur'd through the shore.
  So the grim lion, from his nightly den,
  O'erleaps the fences, and invades the pen,
  On sheep or goats, resistless in his way,
  He falls, and foaming rends the guardless prey;
  Nor stopp'd the fury of his vengeful hand,
  Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian band.
  Ulysses following, as his partner slew,
  Back by the foot each slaughter'd warrior drew;
  The milk-white coursers studious to convey
  Safe to the ships, he wisely cleared the way:
  Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles bred,
  Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead.
  Now twelve despatch'd, the monarch last they found;
  Tydides' falchion fix'd him to the ground.
  Just then a deathful dream Minerva sent,
  A warlike form appear'd before his tent,
  Whose visionary steel his bosom tore:
  So dream'd the monarch, and awaked no more.(218)

  Ulysses now the snowy steeds detains,
  And leads them, fasten'd by the silver reins;
  These, with his bow unbent, he lash'd along;
  (The scourge forgot, on Rhesus' chariot hung;)
  Then gave his friend the signal to retire;
  But him, new dangers, new achievements fire;
  Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking blade
  To send more heroes to the infernal shade,
  Drag off the car where Rhesus' armour lay,
  Or heave with manly force, and lift away.
  While unresolved the son of Tydeus sladden mortal sight,
  And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light:
  When baleful Eris, sent by Jove's command,
  The torch of discord blazing in her hand,
  Through the red skies her bloody sign extends,
  And, wrapt in tempests, o'er the fleet descends.
  High on Ulysses' bark her horrid stand
  She took, and thunder'd through the seas and land.

  Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound,
  Whose ships, remote, the guarded navforward to the field.
  To second these, in close array combined,
  The squadrons spread their sable wings behind.
  Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy sun,
  As with the light the warriors' toils begun.
  Even Jove, whose thunder spoke his wrath, distill'd
  Red drops of blood o'er all the fatal field;(220)
  The woes of men unwilling to survey,
  And all the slaughters that must stain the day.

  Near Ilus' tomb, in order ranged around,
  The Trojan lines possess'd the rising ground:
  There wise Polydamas and Hector stood;
  Ä†neas, honour'd as a guardian god;
  Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine;
  The brother-warriors of Antenor's line:
  With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous face
  And fair proportion match'd the ethereal race.
  Great Hector, cover'd with his spacious shield,
  Plies all the troops, and orders all the field.
  As the red star now shows his sanguine fires
  Through the dark clouds, and now in night retires,
  Thus through the ranks appear'd the godlike man,
  Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van;
  While streamy sparkles, restless as he flies,
  Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies.
  As sweating reapers in some wealthy field,
  Ranged in two bands, their crooked weapons wield,
  Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet;
  Thick fall the heapy harvests at their feet:
  So Greece and Troy the field of war divide,
  And falling ranks are strow'd on every side.
  None stoop'd a thought to base inglorious flight;(221)
  But horse to horse, and man to man they fight,
  Not rabid wolves more fierce contest their prey;
  Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the day.
  Discord with joy the scene of death descries,
  And drinks large slaughter at her sanguine eyes:
  Discord alone, of all the immortal train,
  Swells the red horrors of this direful plain:
  The gods in peace their golden mansions fill,
  Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill:
  But general murmurs told their griefs above,
  And each accused the partial will of Jove.
  Meanwhile apart, sswift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued,
  Hot with his toil, and bathed in hostile blood.
  Now near the beech-tree, and the Scaean gates,
  The hero halts, and his associates waits.
  Meanwhile on every side around the plain,
  Dispersed, disorder'd, fly the Trojan train.
  So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismay'd
  The lion's roaring through the midnight shade;
  On heaps they tumble with successless haste;
  The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.
  Not with less fury stern Atrides flew,
  Still press'd the rout, and still the hindmost slew;
  Hurl'd from their cars the bravest chiefs are kill'd,
  And rage, and death, and carnage load the field.

  Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall;
  Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
  But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills,
  And down their summits pour'd a hundred rills:
  The unkindled lightning in his hand he took,
  And thus the many-coloured ma  Unwept, uncover'd, on the plain he lay,
  While the proud victor bore his arms away.

  Coon, Antenor's eldest hope, was nigh:
  Tears, at the sight, came starting from his eye,
  While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he view'd,
  And the pale features now deform'd with blood.
  Then, with his spear, unseen, his time he took,
  Aim'd at the king, and near his elbow strook.
  The thrilling steel transpierced the brawny part,
  And through his arm stood forth the barbed dart.
  Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fear
  On Coon rushes with his lifted spear:
  His brother's corpse the pious Trojan draws,
  And calls his country to assert his cause;
  Defends him breathless on the sanguine field,
  And o'er the body spreads his ample shield.
  Atrides, marking an unguarded part,
  Transfix'd the warrior with his brazen dart;
  Prone on his brother's bleeding breast he lay,
  The monarch's falchion lopp'd his head away:
  The social shades the same dark journey go,
  And join each other in the realms below.

  The vengeful victor rages round the fields,
  With every weapon art or fury yields:
  By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone,
  Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops o'erthrown.
  This, while yet warm distill'd the purple flood;
  But when the wound grew stiff with clotted blood,
  Then grinding tortures his strong bosom rend,
  Less keen those darts the fierce Ilythiae send:
  (The powers that cause the teeming matron's throes,
  Sad mothers of unutterable woes!)
  Stung with the smart, all-panting with the pain,
  He mounts the car, and gives his squire the rein;
  Then with a voice which fury made more strong,
  And pain augmented, thus exhorts the throng:

  "O friends! O Greeks! assert your honours won;
  Proceed, and finish what this arm begun:
  Lo! angry Jove forbids your chief to stay,
  And envies half the glories of the day."

  He said: the driver whirls his lengthful thong;
  The horses fly; the chariot smokes along.
  Clouds from their nostrils the fierce couushing lion fear."

  He dauntless thus: "Thou conqueror of the fair,
  Thou woman-warrior with the curling hair;
  Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart,
  Unskill'd in arms to act a manly part!
  Thou hast but done what boys or women can;
  Such hands may wound, but not incense a man.
  Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave,
  A coward's weapon never hurts the brave.
  Not so this dart, which thou may'st one day feel;
  Fate wings its flight, and death is on the steel:
  Where this but lights, some noble life expires;
  Its touch makes orphans, bathes the cheeks of sires,
  Steeps earth in purple, gluts the birds of air,
  And leaves such objects as distract the fside, and bared it to the bone.
  By Pallas' care, the spear, though deep infix'd,
  Stopp'd short of life, nor with his entrails mix'd.

  The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew,
  Then furious thus (but first some steps withdrew):
  "Unhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace,
  Fate calls thee hence and finish'd is thy race.
  Nor longer check my conquests on the foe;
  But, pierced by this, to endless darkness go,
  And add one spectre to the realms below!"

  He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright,
  Trembling gave way, and turn'd his back to flight;
  Between his shoulders pierced the following dart,
  And held its passage through the panting heart:
  Wide in his breast appear'd the grisly wound;
  He falls; his armour rings against the ground.
  Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain:
  "Famed son of Hippasus! there press the plain;
  There ends thy narrow span assign'd by fate,
  Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.
  Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose;
  Thy dying eyes no tender mother close;
  But hungry birds shall tear those balls away,
  And hovering vultures scream around their prey.
  Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom,
  With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb."

  Then raging with intolerable smart,
  He writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
  The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued,
  And gladden'd Troy with sight of hostile blood.
  Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade,
  Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.
  Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears;
  The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears:
  Alarm'd, to Ajax Telamon he cried,
  Who shares his labours, and defends his side:
  "O friend! Ulysses' shouts invade my ear;
  Distressed he seems, and no assistance near;
  Strong as he is, yet one opposed to all,
  Oppress'd by multitudes, the best may fall.
  Greece robb'd of him must bid her host despair,
  And feel a loss not ages can repair."

  Then, where the cry directs, his course save."
  Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears,
  Who spread their bucklers, and advance their spears,
  To guard their wounded friend: while thus they stand
  With pious care, great Ajax joins the band:
  Each takes new courage at the hero's sight;
  The hero rallies, and renews the fight.

  Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires,
  While Nestor's chariot far from fight retires:
  His coursers steep'd in sweat, and stain'd with gore,
  The Greeks' preserver, great Machaon, bore.
  That hour Achilles, from the topmost height
  Of his proud fleet, o'erlook'd the fields of fight;
  His feasted eyes beheld around the plain
  The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.
  His friend Machaon singled from the rest,
  A transient pity touch'd his vengeful breast.
  Straight to Menoetius' much-loved son he sent:
  Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent;
  In evil hour! Then fate decreed his doom,
  And fix'd the date of all his woes to come.

  "Why calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay;
  Whate'er thy will, Patroclus shall obey."

  "O first of friends! (Pelides thus replied)
  Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
  The time is come, when yon despairing host
  Shall learn the value of the man they lost:
  Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan,
  And proud Atrides tremble on his throne.
  Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught
  What wounded warrior late his chariot brought:
  For, seen at distance, and but seen behind,
  His form recall'd Machaon to my mind;
  Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his face,
  The coursers pass'd mend swells with martial pride,
  Myself the foremost; but my sire denied;
  Fear'd for my youth, exposed to stern alarms;
  And stopp'd my chariot, and detain'd my arms.
  My sire denied in vain: on foot I fled
  Amidst our chariots; for the goddess led.

  "Along fair Arene's delightful plain
  Soft Minyas rolls his waters to the main:
  There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite,
  And sheathed in arms, expect the dawning light.
  Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame,
  To great Alphaeus' sacred source we came.
  There first to Jove our solemn rites were paid;
  An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid;
  A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull was slain
  To the blue monarch of the watery main.
  In arms we slept, beside the winding flood,
  While round the town the fierce Epeians stood.
  Soon as the sun, with all-revealing ray,
  Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day.
  Bright scenes of arms, and works of war appear;
  The nations meet; there Pylos, Elis here.
  The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled;
  King Augias' son, and spouse of Agamede:
  (She that all simples' healing virtues knew,
  And every herb that drinks the morning dew:)
  I seized his car, the van of battle led;
  The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled.
  The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior kill'd,
  Fierce as the whirlwind now I swept the field:
  Full fifty captive chariots graced my train;
  Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain.
  Then Actor's sons had died, but Neptune shrouds
  The youthful heroes in a veil of clouds.
  O'er heapy shields, and o'er the prostrate throng,
  Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all along,
  Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes,
  Where o'er the vales the Olenian rocks arose;
  Till Pallas stopp'd us where Alisium flows.
  Even there the hindmost of the rear I slay,
  And the same arm that led concludes the day;
  Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way.
  There to high Jove were public thanks assign'd,
  As first of gods; to Nestor, of mthe attack; in
which, after many actions, Sarpedon makes the first breach in the wall.
Hector also, casting a stone of vast size, forces open one of the gates,
and enters at the head of his troops, who victoriously pursue the Grecians
even to their ships.

  While thus the hero's pious cares attend
  The cure and safety of his wounded friend,
  Trojans and Greeks with clashing shields engage,
  And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage.
  Nor long the trench or lofty walls oppose;
  With gods averse the ill-fated works arose;
  Their powers neglected, and no victim slain,
  The walls were raised, the trenches sunk in vain.

  Without the gods, how short a period stands
  The proudest monument of mortal hands!
  This stood while Hector and Achilles raged.
  While sacred Troy the warring hosts engaged;
  But when her sons were slain, her city burn'd,
  And what survived of Greece to Greece return'd;
  Then Neptune and Apollo shook the shore,
  Then Ida's summits pour'd their watery store;
  Rhesus and Rhodius then unite their rills,
  Caresus roaring down the stony hills,
  Ä†sepus, Granicus, with mingled force,
  And Xanthus foaming from his fruitful source;
  And gulfy Simois, rolling to the main(224)
  Helmets, and shields, and godlike heroes slain:
  These, turn'd by Phoebus from their wonted ways,
  Deluged the rampire nine continual days;
  The weight of waters saps the yielding wall,
  And to the sea the floating bulwarks fall.
  Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours,
  And half the skies descend in sluicy showers.
  The god of ocean, marching stern before,
  With his huge trident wounds the trembling shore,
  Vast stones and piles from their foundation heaves,
  And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves.
  Now smooth'd with sand, and levell'd by the flood,
  No fragment tells where once the wonder stood;
  In their old bounds the rivers roll again,
  Shine 'twixt the hills, or wander o'er the plain.(225)

  But this the gods in later times perform;
  As yet the bulwaians strove their ships to gain;
  Swift through the wall their horse and chariots pass'd,
  The gates half-open'd to receive the last.
  Thither, exulting in his force, he flies:
  His following host with clamours rend the skies:
  To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main,
  Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!

  To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,
  Who from the Lapiths' warlike race descend;
  This Polypoetes, great Perithous' heir,
  And that Leonteus, like the god of war.
  As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise;
  Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies:
  Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crown'd,
  Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground;
  High on the hills appears their stately form,
  And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.
  So graceful these, and so the shock they stand
  Of raging Asius, and his furious band.
  Orestes, Acamas, in front appear,
  And OEnomaus and Thoon close the rear:
  In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields,
  In vain around them beat their hollow shields;
  The fearless brothers on the Grecians call,
  To guard their navies, and defend the wall.
  Even when they saw Troy's sable troops impend,
  And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend,
  Forth from the portals rush'd the intrepid pair,
  Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war.
  So two wild boars spring furious from their den,
  Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men;
  On every side the crackling trees they tear,
  And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare;
  They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll,
  Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul.
  Around their heads the whistling javelins sung,
  With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung;
  Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers
  Maintain'd the walls, and mann'd the lofty towers:
  To save their fleet their last efforts they try,
  And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly.

  As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings
  Th, or where descend;
  To right, to left, unheeded take your way,
  While I the dictates of high heaven obey.
  Without a sign his sword the brave man draws,
  And asks no omen but his country's cause.
  But why should'st thou suspect the war's success?
  None fears it more, as none promotes it less:
  Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire,
  Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire.
  Troy and her sons may find a general grave,
  But thou canst live, for thou canst be a slave.
  Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests
  Spread their cold poison through our soldiers' breasts,
  My javelin can revenge so base a part,
  And free ths are cover'd o'er,
  Then the green fields, and then the sandy shore;
  Bent with the weight, the nodding woods are seen,
  And one bright waste hides all the works of men:
  The circling seas, alone absorbing all,
  Drink the dissolving fleeces as they fall:
  So from each side increased the stony rain,
  And the white ruin rises o'er the plain.

  Thus godlike Hector and his troops contend
  To force the ramparts, and the gates to rend:
  Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield,
  Till great Sarpedon tower'd amid the field;
  For mighty Jove inspired with martial flame
  His matchless son, and urged him on to fame.
  In arms he shines, conspicuous from afar,
  And bears aloft his ample shield in  glory give!"

  He said; his words the listening chief inspire
  With equal warmth, and rouse the warrior's fire;
  The troops pursue their leaders with delight,
  Rush to the foe, and claim the promised fight.
  Menestheus from on high the storm beheld
  Threatening the fort, and blackening in the field:
  Around the walls he gazed, to view from far
  What aid appear'd to avert the approaching war,
  And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood,
  Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood.
  In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields
  Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields,
  The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound,
  Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground
  Then thus to Thoos: "Hence with speed (he said),
  And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid;
  Their strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Hither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely there the foes contend,
  Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along
  The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng,
  And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore,
  Opposed in combat on the dusty shore.
  "Ye valiant leaders of our warlike bands!
  Your aid (said Thoos) Peteus' son demands;
  Your strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Thither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely, here, the foes contend,
  At least, let Telamon those towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Straight to the fort great Ajax turn'd his care,
  And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:
  "Now, valiant Lycomede! exert your might,
  And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight;
  To you I trust the fortune of the field,
  Till by this arm the foe beams give way,
  The folds are shatter'd; from the crackling door
  Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar.
  Now rushing in, the furious chief appears,
  Gloomy as night! and shakes two shining spears:(228)
  A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came,
  And from his eye-balls flash'd the living flame.
  He moves a god, resistless in his course,
  And seems a match for more than mortal force.
  Then pouring after, through the gaping space,
  A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place;
  The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly;
  The shore is heap'd with death, and tumult rends the sky.

                       [Illustration: GREEK ALTAR.]

                               GREEK ALTAR.





BOOK XIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THE ACTS
OF IDOMENEUS.

Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the
fortification forced by Hector, (who had entered the gate near the station
of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires those heroes to
oppose him: then, in the form of one of the generals, encourages the other
Greeks who had retired to their vessels. The Ajaces form their troops in a
close phalanx, and put a stop to Hector and the Trojans. Several deeds of
valour are performed; Meriones, losing his spear in the encounter, repairs
to seek a O warriors, all our hopes to raise:
  Oh recollect your ancient worth and praise!
  'Tis yours to save us, if you cease to fear;
  Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.
  On other works though Troy with fury fall,
  And pour her armies o'er our batter'd wall:
  There Greece has strength: but this, this part o'erthrown,
  Her strength were vain; I dread for you alone:
  Here Hector rages like the force of fire,
  Vaunts of his gods, and calls high Jove his sire:
  If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,
  Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight,
  Greece yet may live, her threaten'd fleet maintain:
  And Hector's force, and Jove's own aid, be vain."

  Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls,
  He touch'd the chiefs, and steel'd their manly souls:
  Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,
  Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
  Then, as a falcon from the rocky height,
  Her quarry seen, impike frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued,
  A prey to every savage of the wood:
  Shall these, so late who trembled at your name,
  Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?
  A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
  The soldiers' baseness, or the general's fault?
  Fools! will ye perish for your leader's vice;
  The purchase infamy, and life the price?
  'Tis not your cause, Achilles' injured fame:
  Another's is the crime, but yours the shame.
  Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust,
  Must you be cowards, if your king's unjust?
  Prevent this evil, and your country save:
  Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
  Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame
  I waste no anger, for they feel no shame:
  But you, the pride, the flower of all our host,
  My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!
  Nor deem this day, this battle, all you lose;
  A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues.
  Let each reflect, who prizes fs heart,
  Cteatus' son, of Neptune's forceful line;
  Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
  Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
  To seize his beamy helm the victor flies,
  And just had fastened on the dazzling prize,
  When Ajax' manly arm a javelin flung;
  Full on the shield's round boss the weapon rung;
  He felt the shock, nor more was doom'd to feel,
  Secure in mail, and sheath'd in shining steel.
  Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain
  The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
  Between the leaders of the Athenian line,
  (Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
  Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies;
  Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces' prize.
  As two grim lions bear across the lawn,
  Snatch'd from devouring hounds, a slaughter'd fawn.
  In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood,
  And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood;
  So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead
  Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head:
  Toss'd like a ball, and whirl'd in air away,
  At Hector's feet the gory visage lay.

  The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,
  And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain,
  Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands,
  And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
  Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet,
  He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete,
  His pensive brow the generous care express'd
  With which a wounded soldier touch'd his breast,
  Whom in the chance of war a javelin tore,
  And his sad comrades from the battle bore;
  Him to the surgeons of the camp he sent:
  That office paid, he issued from his tent
  Fierce for the fight: to whom the god begun,
  In Thoas' voice, Andraemon's valiant son,
  Who ruled where Calydon's white rocks arise,
  And Pleuron's chalky cliffs emblaze the skies:

  "Where's now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast,
  Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?"

  To whom the king: "On Greece no blame be thrown;
   the skies:
  Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven,
  Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darken'd heaven.
  All dreadful glared the iron face of war,
  Bristled with upright spears, that flash'd afar;
  Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,
  And polish'd arms emblazed the flaming fields:
  Tremendous scene! that general horror gave,
  But touch'd with joy the bosoms of the brave.

  Saturn's great sons in fierce contention vied,
  And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
  The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won
  To crown with glory Peleus' godlike son,
  Will'd not destruction to the Grecian powers,
  But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers;
  While Neptune, rising from his azure main,
  Warr'd on the king of heaven with stern disdain,
  And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
  Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
  Alike divine, and heaven their native place;
  But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,
  And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
  For this, of Jove's superior might afraid,
  Neptune in human form conceal'd his aid.
  These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train
  In war and discord's adamantine chain,
  Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie
  Is stretch'd on both, and close compell'd they die.

  Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,
  The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
  First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,
  Swell'd with false hopes, with mad ambition vain;
  Call'd by the voice of war to martial fame,
  From high Cabesus' distant walls he came;
  Cassandra's love he sought, with boastseauteous eyes,
  And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet
  His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
  Fix'd as some column, or deep-rooted oak,
  While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.
  Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields,
  Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.
  The riven armour sends a jarring sound;
  His labouring heart heaves wiight.
  As the fell boar, on some rough mountain's head,
  Arm'd with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred,
  When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,
  Attends the tumult, and expects the war;
  O'er his bent back the bristly horrors rise;
  Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,
  His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
  But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:
  So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook,
  And met the Trojan with a lowering look.
  Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near,
  The youthful offspring of the god of war,
  Merion, and Aphareus, in field renown'd:
  To these the warrior sent his voice around.
  "Fellows in arms! your timely aid unite;
  Lo, great Ä†neas rushes to the fight:
  Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold;
  He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.
  Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife,
  The great dispute, of glory, or of life."

  He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obey'd;
  Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade
  Around the chief. Ä†neas too demands
  Th' assisting forces of his native bands;
  Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;
  (Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;)
  In order follow all th' embodied train,
  Like Ida's flocks proceeding o'er the plain;
  Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,
  Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold.
  With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads
  To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads:
  So joys Ä†neas, as his native band
  Moves on in rank, and stretches o'er the land.

  Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose;
  On every side the steely circle grows;
  Now batter'd breast-plates and hack'd helmets ring,
  And o'er their h, and mortal is the wound.
  Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground,
  Lay panting. Thus an ox in fetters tied,
  While death's strong pangs distend his labouring side,
  His bulk enormous on the field displays;
  His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life decays.
  The spear the conqueror from his body drew,
  And death's dim shadows swarm before his view.
  Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid:
  King Helenus waved high the Thracian blade,
  And smote his temples with an arm so strong,
  The helm fell off, and roll'd amid the throng:
  There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize;
  For dark in death the godlike owner lies!
  Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns,
  And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns:
  That shook the ponderous lance, in act to throw;
  And this stood adverse with the bended bow:
  Full on his breast the Trojan arrow fell,
  But harmless bounded from the plated steel.
  As on some ample barn's well harden'd floor,
  (The winds collected at each open door,)
  While the broad fan with force is whirl'd around,
  Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground:
  So from the steel that guards Atrides' heart,
  Repell'd to distance flies the bounding dart.
  Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe,
  Pierced with his lance the hand that grasp'd the bow.
  And nailed it to the yew: the wounded hand
  Trail'd the long lance that mark'd with blood the sand:
  But good Agenor gently from the wound
  The spear solicits, and the bandage bound;
  A sling's soft wool, snatch'd from a soldier's side,
  At once the tent and ligature supplied.

  Behold! Pisander, urged by fate's decree,
  Springs through the ranks to fall, and fall by thee,
  Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame:
  High-towering in the front, the warrior came.
  First the sharp lance was by Atrides thrown;
  The lance far distant by the winds was blown.
  Nor pierced Pisander through Atrides' shield:
  Pisander's spear fell shiver'd on the field.
  Not so discouraged, to the future blind,
  Vain dreams ofollowed through the field,
  Who bore by turns great Ajax' sevenfold shield;
  Whene'er he breathed, remissive of his might,
  Tired with the incessant slaughters of the fight.
  No following troops his brave associate grace:
  In close engagement an unpractised race,
  The Locrian squadrons nor the javelin wield,
  Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield;
  But skill'd from far the flying shaft to wing,
  Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling,
  Dexterous with these they aim a certain wound,
  Or fell the distant warrior to the ground.
  Thus in the van the Telamonian train,
  Throng'd in bright arms, a pressing fight maintain:
  Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie,
  Whose stones and arrows intercept the sky,
  The mingled tempest on the foes they pour;
  Troy's scattering orders open to the shower.

  Now had the Greeks eternal fame acquired,
  And the gall'd Ilians to their walls retired;
  But sage Polydamas, discreetly brave,
  Address'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

  "Though great in all, thou seem'st averse to lend
  Impartial audience to a faithful friend;
  To gods and men thy matchless worth is known,
  And every art of glorious war thy own;
  But in cool thought and counsel to excel,
  How widely differs this from warring well!
  Content with what the bounteous gods have given,
  Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven.
  To some the powers of bloody war belong,
  To some sweet music and the charm of song;
  To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assign'd
  A wise, extensive, all-considering mind;
  Their guardians these, the nations round confess,
  And towns and empires for their safety bless.
  If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast,
  Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best,
  See, as thou mov'st, on dangers dangers spread,
  And war's whole fury burns around thy head.
  Behold! distress'd within yon hostile wall,
  How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
  What troops, out-number'd, scarce the war maintain!
  And what brave heroes at the ships lie ed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the extremity of the danger.
Agamemnon proposes to make their escape by night, which Ulysses
withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that, wounded as they were,
they should go forth and encourage the army with their presence, which
advice is pursued. Juno, seeing the partiality of Jupiter to the Trojans,
forms a design to over-reach him: she sets off her charms with the utmost
care, and (the more surely to enchant him) obtains the magic girdle of
Venus. She then applies herself to the god of sleep, and, with some
difficulty, persuades him to seal the eyes of Jupiter: this done, she goes
to mount Ida, where the god, at first sight, is ravished with her beauty,
sinks in her embraces, and is laid asleep. Neptune takes advantage of his
slumber, and succours the Greeks: Hector is struck to the ground with a
prodigious stone by Ajax, and carried off from the battle: several actions
succeed, till the Trojans, much distressed, are obliged to give way: the
lesser Ajax signalizes himself in a particular manner.

  But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl,
  Could charm the cares of Nestor's watchful soul;
  His startled ears the increasing cries attend;
  Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend:

  "What new alarm, divine Machaon, say,
  What mix'd events attend this mighty day?
  Hark! how the shouts divide, and how they meet,
  And now come full, and thicken to the fleet!
  Here with the cordial draught dispel thy care,
  Let Hecamede the strengthening bath prepare,
  Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore;
  While I the adventures of the day explore."

  He said: and, seizing Thrasymedes' shield,
  (His valiant offspring,) hasten'd to the field;
  (That day the son his father's buckler bore;)
  Then snatch'd a lance, and issued from the door.
  Soon as the prospect open'd to his view,
  His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew;
  Dire disarray! the tumult of the fight,
  The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight.
  As when old ocean's silent surface sthe last.
  From him, my sire. From Calydon expell'd,
  He pass'd to Argos, and in exile dwell'd;
  The monarch's daughter there (so Jove ordain'd)
  He won, and flourish'd where Adrastus reign'd;
  There, rich in fortune's gifts, his acres till'd,
  Beheld his vines their liquid harvest yield,
  And numerous flocks that whiten'd all the field.
  Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in fame!
  Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name.
  Then, what for common good my thoughts inspire,
  Attend, and in the son respect the sire.
  Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppress'd,
  Let each go forth, and animate the rest,
  Advance the glory which he cannot share,
  Though not partaker, witness of the war.
  But lest new wounds on wounds o'erpower us quite,
  Beyond the missile javelin's sounding flight,
  Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult far,
  Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war."

  He added not: the listening kings obey,
  Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.
  The god of ocean (to inflame their rage)
  Appears a warrior furrowed o'er with age;
  Press'd in his own, the general's hand he took,
  And thus the venerable hero spoke:

  "Atrides! lo! with what disdainful eye
  Achilles sees his country's forces fly;
  Blind, impious man! whose anger is his guide,
  Who glories in unutterable pride.
  So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim
  The wretch relentless, and o'erwhelm with shame!
  But Heaven forsakes not thee: o'er yonder sands
  Soon shall thou view the scattered Trojan bands
  Fly diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renown'd,
  Driven heaps on heaps, with clouds involved around
  Of rolling dust, their winged wheels employ
  To hide their ignominious heads in Troy."

  He spoke, then rush'd amid the warrior crew,
  And sent his voice before him as he flew,
  Loud, as the shout encountering armies yield
  When twice ten thousand shake the labouring field;
  Such was the voice, and such the thundering sound
  Of him whose trident rends the solid ground.
  Each Argive bosothy loved-one shall be ever thine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."(235)

  "Swear then (he said) by those tremendous floods
  That roar through hell, and bind the invoking gods:
  Let the great parent earth one hand sustain,
  And stretch the other o'er the sacred main:
  Call the black Titans, that with Chronos dwell,
  To hear and witness from the depths of hell;
  That she, my loved-one, shall be ever mine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."

  The queen assents, and from the infernal bowers
  Invokes the sable subtartarean powers,
  And those who rule the inviolable floods,
  Whom mortals name the dread Titanian gods.

        [Illustration: SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.]

                SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.


  Then swift as wind, o'er Lemnos' smoky isle
  They wing their way, and Imbrus' sea-beat soil;
  Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide,
  And light on Lectos, on the point of Ide:
  (Mother of savages, whose echoing hills
  Are heard resounding with a hundred rills:)
  Fair Ida trembles underneath the god;
  Hush'd are her mountains, and her forests nod.
  There on a fir, whose spiry branches rise
  To join its summit to the neighbouring skies;
  Dark in embowering shade, conceal'd from sight,
  Sat Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night.
  (Chalcis his name by those of heavenly birth,
  But call'd Cymindis by the race of earth.)

  To Ida's top successful Juno flies;
  Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes:
  The god, whose lightning sets the heavens on fire,
  Through all his bosom feels the fierce desire;
  Fierce as when first by stealth he seized her charms,
  Mix'd with her soul, and melted in her arms:
  Fix'd on her eyes he fed his eager look,
  Then press'd her hand, and thus with transport spoke:

  "Why comes my goddess from the ethereal sky,
  And not her steeds and flaming chariot nigh?"

  Then she--"I haste to those remote abodes
  Where the great parents of the deathless gods,
  The reverend Ocean and grayse in huge ranks, and form'd a watery wall
  Around the ships: seas hanging o'er the shores,
  Both armies join: earth thunders, ocean roars.
  Not half so loud the bellowing deeps resound,
  When stormy winds disclose the dark profound;
  Less loud the winds that from the Ä†olian hall
  Roar through the woods, and make whole forests fall;
  Less loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour,
  Catch the dry mountain, and its shades devour;
  With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven,
  And such a clamour shakes the sounding heaven.
  The first bold javelin, urged by Hector's force,
  Direct at Ajax' bosom winged its course;
  But there no pass the crossing belts afford,
  (One braced his shield, and one sustain'd his sword.)
  Then back the disappointed Trojan drew,
  And cursed the lance that unavailing flew:
  But 'scaped not Ajax; his tempestuous hand
  A ponderous stone upheaving from the sand,
  (Where heaps laid loose beneath the warrior's feet,
  Or served to ballast, or to prop the fleet,)
  Toss'd round and round, the missive marble flings;
  On the razed shield the fallen ruin rings,
  Full on his breast and throat with force descends;
  Nor deaden'd there its giddy fury spends,
  But whirling on, with many a fiery round,
  Smokes in the dust, and ploughs into the ground.
  As when the bolt, red-hissing from above,
  Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove,
  The mountain-oak in flaming ruin lies,
  Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise;
  Stiff with amaze the pale beholders stand,
  And own the terrors of the almighty hand!
  So lies great Hector prostrate on the shore;
  His slacken'd hand deserts the lance it bore;
  His following shield the fallen chief o'erspread;
  Beneath his helmet dropp'd his fainting head;
  His load of armour, sinking to the ground,
  Clanks on the field, a dead and hollow sound.
  Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain;
  Greece sees, in hope, Troy's great defender slain:
  All spring to seize him; storms of arrows fly,
  And thicker javelins Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector in a
swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highly incensed at the
artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions; she is then sent to
Iris and Apollo. Juno, repairing to the assembly of the gods, attempts,
with extraordinary address, to incense them against Jupiter; in particular
she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he is ready to take arms, but
is prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris
commands Neptune to leave the battle, to which, after much reluctance and
passion, he consents. Apollo reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him
back to the battle, marches before him with his aegis, and turns the
fortune of the fight. He breaks down great part of the Grecian wall: the
Trojans rush in, and attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are,
as yet, repelled by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.

  Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound,
  And many a chief lay gasping on the ground:
  Then stopp'd and panted, where the chariots lie
  Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
  Meanwhile, awaken'd from his dream of love,
  On Ida's summit sat imperial Jove:
  Round the wide fields he cast a careful view,
  There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue;
  These proud in arms, those scatter'd o'er the plain
  And, 'midst the war, the monarch of the main.
  Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies,
  (His sad associates round with weeping eyes,)
  Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath,
  His senses wandering to the verge of death.
  The god beheld him with a pitying look,
  And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke:

  "O thou, still adverse to the eternal will,
  For ever studious in promoting ill!
  Thy arts have made the godlike Hector yield,
  And driven his conquering squadrons from the field.
  Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, w, dare not vent a sigh;
  Thy own loved boasted offspring lies o'erthrown,
  If that loved boasted offspring be thy own."

  Stern Mars, with anguish for his slaughter'd son,
  Smote his rebelling breast, and fierce begun:
  "Thus then, immortals! thus shall Mars obey;
  Forgive me, gods, and yield my vengeance way:
  Descending first to yon forbidden plain,
  The god of battles dares avenge the slain;
  Dares, though the thunder bursting o'er my head
  Should hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead."

  With that he gives command to Fear and Flight
  To join his rapid coursers for the fight:
  Then grim in arms, with hasty vengeance flies;
  Arms that reflect a radiance through the skies.
  And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven,
  Discharged his wrath on half the host of heaven;
  But Pallas, springing through the bright abode,
  Starts from her azure throne to calm the god.
  Struck for the immortal race with timely fear,
  From frantic Mars she snatch'd the shield and spear;
  Then the huge helmet lifting from his head,
  Thus to the impetuous homicide she said:

  "By what wild passion, furious! art thou toss'd?
  Striv'st thou with Jove? thou art already lost.
  Shall not the Thunderer's dread command restrain,
  And was imperial Juno heard in vain?
  Back to the skies wouldst thou with shame be driven,
  And in thy guilt involve the host of heaven?
  Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage,
  The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage;
  Guilty and guiltless find an equal fate
  And one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state.
  Cease then thy offspring's death unjust to call;
  Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
  Why should heaven's law with foolish man comply
  Exempted from the race ordain'd to die?"

  This menace fix'd the warrior to his throne;
  Sullen he sat, and curb'd the rising groan.
  Then Juno call'd (Jove's orders to obey)
  The winged Iris, and the god of day.
  "Go wait the Thunderer's will (Saturnia cried)
  On yon tall summit of the fountful Ide:
  There in ses beat, his spirits rise;
  Again his loved companions meet his eyes;
  Jove thinking of his pains, they pass'd away,
  To whom the god who gives the golden day:

  "Why sits great Hector from the field so far?
  What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?"

  The fainting hero, as the vision bright
  Stood shining o'er him, half unseal'd his sight:

  "What blest immortal, with commanding breath,
  Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death?
  Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword
  Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored,
  The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow
  Had almost sunk me to the shades below?
  Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy,
  And hell's black horrors swim before my eye."

  To him Apollo: "Be no more dismay'd;
  See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.
  Behold! thy Phoebus shall his arms employ,
  Phoebus, propitious still to thee and Troy.
  Inspire thy warriors then with manly force,
  And to the ships impel thy rapid horse:
  Even I will make thy fiery coursers way,
  And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea."

  Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove,
  And breathed immortal ardour from above.
  As when the pamper'd steed, with reins unbound,
  Breaks from his stall, and pours along the ground;
  With ample strokes he rushes to the flood,
  To bathe his sides, and cool his fiery blood;
  His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies:
  He snuffs the females in the well-known plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again:
  Urged by the voice divine, thus Hector flew,
  Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue.
  As when the force of men and dogs combined
  Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind;
  Far from the hunter's rage secure they lie
  Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die)
  When lo! a lion shoots across the way!
  They fly: at once the chasers and the prey.
  So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued,
d.
  Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall;
  And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall:
  Easy as when ashore an infant stands,
  And draws imagined houses in the sands;
  The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play,
  Sweeps the slight works and fashion'd domes away:
  Thus vanish'd at thy touch, the towers and walls;
  The toil of thousands in a moment falls.

  The Grecians gaze around with wild despair,
  Confused, and weary all the powers with prayer:
  Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands;
  And urge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands.
  Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies,
  And weeps his country with a father's eyes.

  "O Jove! if ever, on his native shore,
  One Greek enrich'd thy shrine with offer'd gore;
  If e'er, in hope our country to behold,
  We paid the fattest firstlings of the fold;
  If e'er thou sign'st our wishes with thy nod:
  Perform the promise of a gracious god!
  This day preserve our navies from the flame,
  And save the relics of the Grecian name."

  Thus prayed the sage: the eternal gave consent,
  And peals of thunder shook the firmament.
  Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting sign,
  And catch'd new fury at the voice divine.
  As, when black tempests mix the seas and skies,
  The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise,
  Above the sides of some tall ship ascend,
  Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they rend:
  Thus loudly roaring, and o'erpowering all,
  Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian wall;
  Legions on legions from each side arise:
  Thick sound the keels; the storm of arrows flies.
  Fierce on the ships above, the cars below,
  These wield the mace, and those the javelin throw.

  While thus the thunder of the battle raged,
  And labouring armies round the works engaged,
  Still in the tent Patroclus sat to tend
  The good Eurypylus, his wounded friend.
  He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind,
  And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.
  But when he saw, ascending up the fleet,
  Victorious Troy; then, stard,
  With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
  A dart, whose point with brass refulgent shines,
  The warrior wields; and his great brother joins.

  This Hector saw, and thus express'd his joy:
  "Ye troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!
  Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame,
  And spread your glory with the navy's flame.
  Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but now,
  From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow:
  Indulgent Jove! how plain thy favours shine,
  When happy nations bear the marks divine!
  How easy then, to see the sinking state
  Of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
  Such is the fate of Greece, and such is ours:
  Behold, ye warriors, and exert your powers.
  Death is the worst; a fate which all must try;
  And for our country, 'tis a bliss to die.
  The gallant man, though slain in fight he be,
  Yet leaves his nation safe, his children free;
  Entails a debt on all the grateful state;
  His own brave friends shall glory in his fate;
  His wife live honour'd, all his race succeed,
  And late posterity enjoy the deed!"

  This roused the soul in every Trojan breast:
  The godlike Ajax next his Greeks address'd:

  "How long, ye warriors of the Argive race,
  (To generous Argos what a dire disgrace!)
  How long on these cursed confines will ye lie,
  Yet undetermined, or to live or die?
  What hopes remain, what methods to retire,
  If once your vessels catch the Trojan fire?
  Make how the flames approach, how near they fall,
  How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call!
  Not to the dance that dreadful voice invites,
  It calls to death, and all the rage of fights.
  'Tis now no time for wisdom or debates;
  To your own hands are trusted all your fates;
  And better far in one decisive strife,
  One day should end our labour or our life,
  Than keep this hard-got inch of barren sanses Hector to the work design'd,
  Bids him with more than mortal fury glow,
  And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.
  So Mars, when human

  As when a lion, rushing from his den,
  Amidst the plain of some wide-water'd fen,
  (Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed,
  At large expatiate o'er the ranker mead)
  Leaps on the herds before the herdsman's eyes;
  The trembling herdsman far to distance flies;
  Some lordly bull (the rest dispersed and fled)
  He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.
  Thus from the rage of Jove-like Hector flew
  All Greece in heaps; but one he seized, and slew:
  Mycenian Periphes, a mighty name,
  In wisdom great, in arms well known to fame;
  The minister of stern Eurystheus' ire
  Against Alcides, Copreus was his sire:
  The son redeem'd the honours of the race,
  A son as generous as the sire was base;
  O'er all his country's youth conspicuous far
  In every virtue, or of peace or war:
  But doom'd to Hector's stronger force to yield!
  Against the margin of his ample shield
  He struck his hasty foot: his heels up-sprung;
  Supine he fell; his brazen helmet rung.
  On the fallen chief the invading Trojan press'd,
  And plunged the pointed javelin in his breast.
  His circling friends, who strove to guard too late
  The unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate.

  Chased from the foremost line, the Grecian train
  Now man the next, receding toward the main:
  Wedged in one body at the tents they stand,
  Wall'd round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band.
  Now manly shame forbids the inglorious flight;
  Now fear itself confines them to the fight:
  Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most
  (The sage preserver of the Grecian host)
  Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores;
  And by their parents, by themselves implores.

  "Oh friends! be men: your generous breasts inflame
  With mutual honour, and with mutual shame!
  Think of your hopes, your fortunes; all the care
  Your wives, your infants, and your parents share:
  Think of each living father's reverend head;
  Think of each ancestor with glory dead;
  Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue,
  They ask their safety, and their fale the black vessels smoked with human gore.
  Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies;
  The streaming tears fall copious from his eyes
  Not faster, trickling to the plains below,
  From the tall rock the sable waters flow.
  Divine Pelides, with compassion moved.
  Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:(243)

  "Patroclus, say, what grief thy bosom bears,
  That flows so fast in these unmanly tears?
  No girl, no infant whom the mother keeps
  From her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps;
  Not more the mother's soul, that infant warms,
  Clung to her knees, and reaching at her arms,
  Than thou hast mine! Oh tell me, to what end
  Thy melting sorrows thus pursue thy friend?

  "Griev'st thou for me, or for, my martial band?
  Or come sad tidings from our native land?
  Our fathers live (our first, most tender care),
  Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital air,
  And hoary Peleus yet extends his days;
  Pleased in their age to hear their children's praise.
  Or may some meaner cause thy pity claim?
  Perhaps yon relics of the Grecian name,
  Doom'd in their ships to sink by fire and sword,
  And pay the forfeit of their haughty lord?
  Whate'er the cause, reveal thy secret care,
  And speak those sorrows which a friend would share."
  A sigh that instant from his bosom broke,
  Another follow'd, and Patroclus spoke:

  "Let Greece at length with pity touch thy breast,
  Thyself a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!
  Lo! every chief that might her fate prevent,
  Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent:
  Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreus' son,
  And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan,
  More for their country's wounds than for their own.
  Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease,
  Thy breast alone no lenitives appease.
  May never rage like thine my soul enslave,
  O great in vain! unprofitably brave!
  Thy country slighted in her last distress,
  What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress?
  No--men unborn, and ages yet behind,
  Shall curse that fierce, that unffields.

                         [Illustration: Buckles.]

                                 Buckles.


  The brave Automedon (an honour'd name,
  The second to his lord in love and fame,
  In peace his friend, and partner of the war)
  The winged coursers harness'd to the car;
  Xanthus and Balius, of immortal breed,
  Sprung from the wind, and like the wind in speed.
  Whom the wing'd harpy, swift Podarge, bore,
  By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy shore:
  Swift Pedasus was added to their side,
  (Once great Aetion's, now Achilles' pride)
  Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace,
  A mortal courser match'd the immortal race.

  Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms
  His hardy Myrmidons to blood and arms.
  All breathing death, around the chief they stand,
  A grim, terrific, formidable band:
  Grim as voracious wolves, that seek the springs(244)
  When scalding thirst their burning bowels wrings;
  When some tall stag, fresh-slaughtered in the wood,
  Has drench'd their wide insatiate throats with blood,
  To the black fount they rush, a hideous throng,
  With paunch distended, and with lolling tongue,
  Fire fills their eye, their black jaws belch the gore,
  And gorged with slaughter still they thirst for more.
  Like furious, rush'd the Myrmidonian crew,
  Such their dread strength, and such their deathful view.

  High in the midst the great Achilles stands,
  Directs their order, and the war commands.
  He, loved of Jove, had launch'd for Ilion's shores
  Full fifty vessels, mann'd with fifty oars:
  Five chosen leaders the fierce bands obey,
  Himself supreme in valour, as in sway.

  First march'd Menestheus, of celestial birth,
  Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth,
  Divine Sperchius! Jove-descended flood!
  A mortal mother mixing with a god.
  Such was Menestheus, but miscall'd by fame
  The son of Borus, that espoused the dame.

  Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay,
  Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day.
  Her, sly Cellenius loved: on her would gaze, ground.
  His troops, that see their country's glory slain,
  Fly diverse, scatter'd o'er the distant plain.
  Patroclus' arm forbids the spreading fires,
  And from the half-burn'd ship proud Troy retires;
  Clear'd from the smoke the joyful navy lies;
  In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies;
  Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends,
  And loud acclaim the starry region rends.
  So when thick clouds enwrap the mountain's head,
  O'er heaven's expanse like one black ceiling spread;
  Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray,
  Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day:
  The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise,
  And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes;
  The smiling scene wide opens to the sight,
  And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.

  But Troy repulsed, and scatter'd o'er the plains,
  Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.
  Now every Greek some hostile hero slew,
  But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew:
  As Areilycus had turn'd him round,
  Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound;
  The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown,
  The thigh transfix'd, and broke the brittle bone:
  Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance;
  Thy breast, unarm'd, received the Spartan lance.
  Phylides' dart (as Amphidus drew nigh)
  His blow prr charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
  Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies;
  Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies;
  Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight;
  Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatch'd from sight.
  The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down,
  Scour o'er the fields, and stretch to reach the town.
  Loud o'er the rou  Not with less ease the barbed javelin bore
  The gaping dastard; as the spear was shook,
  He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook.

  Next on Eryalus he flies; a stone,
  Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown:
  Full on his crown the ponderous fragment flew,
  And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two:
  Prone to the ground the breathless warrior fell,
  And death involved him with the shades of hell.
  Then low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie;
  Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die;
  Amphoterus and Erymas succeed;
  And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.
  Where'er he moves, the growing slaughters spread
  In heaps on heaps a monument of dead.

  When now Sarpedon his brave friends beheld
  Grovelling in dust, and gasping on the field,
  With this reproach his flying host he warms:
  "Oh stain to honour! oh disgrace to arms!
  Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain;
  This hand unaided shall the war sustain:
  The task be mine this hero's strength to try,
  Who mows whole troops, and makes an army fly."

  He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car:
  Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the war.
  As when two vultures on the mountain's height
  Stoop with resounding pinions to the fight;
  They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming cry;
  The desert echoes, and the rocks reply:
  The warriors thus opposed in arms, engage
  With equal clamours, and with equal rage.

  Jove view'd the combat: whose event foreseen,
  He thus bespoke his sister and his queen:
  "The hour draws on; the destinies ordain,(245)
  My godlike son shall press the Phrygian plain:
  Already on the verge of death he stands,
  His life is owed to fierce Patroclus' hands,
  What passions in a parent's breast debate!
  Say, shall I snatch l-seeing monarch! whether Lycia's coast,
  Or sacred Ilion, thy bright presence boast,
  Powerful alike to ease the wretch's smart;
  O hear me! god of every healing art!
  Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain,
  That thrills my arm, and shoots through every vein,
  I stand unable to susta our prize.
  Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread,
  And send the living Lycians to the dead."

  The heroes kindle at his fierce command;
  The martial squadrons close on either hand:
  Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms,
  Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.
  With horrid shouts they circle round the slain;
  The clash of armour rings o'er all the plain.
  Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight,
  O'er the fierce armies pours pernicious night,
  And round his son confounds the warring hosts,
  His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts.

  Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;
  Agacleus' son, from Budium's lofty walls;
  Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came
  To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame;
  Now sent to Troy, Achilles' arms to aid,
  He pays due vengeance to his kinsman's shade.
  Soon as his luckless hand had touch'd the dead,
  A rock's large fragment thunder'd on his head;
  Hurl'd by Hectorean force it cleft in twain
  His shatter'd helm, and stretch'd him o'er the slain.

  Fierce to the van of fight Patroclus came,
  And, like an eagle darting at his game,
  Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian band.
  What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand,
  O generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown,
  At Sthenelaus flew the weighty stone,
  Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near
  That arm, drew back; and Hector learn'd to fear.
  Far as an able hand a lance can throw,
  Or at the lists, or at the fighting foe;
  So far the Trojans from their lines retired;
  Till Glaucus, turning, all the rest inspired.
  Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage,
  The only hope of Chalcon's trembling age;
  Wide o'er the land was stretch'd his large domain,
  With stately seats, and riches blest in vain:
  Him, bold with youth, and eager to pursue
  The flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew;
  Pierced through the bosom with a sudden wound,
  He fell, and falling made the fields resound.
  The Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain;
 
  And in a moment reach'd the Lycian land;
  The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid,
  Where endless honours wait the sacred shade.

  Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains,
  With foaming coursers, and with loosen'd reins.
  Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew,
  Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew
  Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain,
  Vain was thy friend's command, thy courage vain.
  For he, the god, whose counsels uncontroll'd
  Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold;
  The god who gives, resumes, and orders all,
  He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.

  Who first, brave hero! by that arm was slain,
  Who last beneath thy vengeance press'd the plain;
  When heaven itself thy fatal fury led,
  And call'd to fill the number of the dead?
  Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds;
  Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds,
  Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground;
  The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crown'd:
  Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night;
  The rest, dispersing, trust their fates to flight.

  Now Troy had stoop'd beneath his matchless power,
  But flaming Phoebus kept the sacred tower
  Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;(246)
  His blazing aegis thrice Apollo shook;
  He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the cloud,
  A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

  "Patroclus! cease; this heaven-defended wall
  Defies thy lance; not fated yet to fall;
  Thy friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand,
  Troy shall not stoop even to Achilles'th calls, and heaven allows no longer day!

  For lo! the god in dusky clouds enshrined,
  Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.
  The weighty shock his neck and shoulders feel;
  His eyes flash sparkles, his stunn'd senses reel
  In giddy darkness; far to distance flung,
  His bounding helmet on the champaign rung.
  Achilles' plume is stain'd with dust and gore;
  That plume which never stoop'd to earth before;
  Long used, untouch'd, in fighting fields to shine,
  And shade the temples of the mad divine.
  Jove dooms it now on Hector's helm to nod;
  Not long--for fate pursues him, and the god.

  His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield
  Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field:
  The corslet his astonish'd breast forsakes:
  Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes;
  Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:
  Such is the force of more than mortal hands!

  A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame,
  From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name;
  Famed for the manage of the foaming horse,
  Skill'd in the dart, and matchless in the course:
  Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car,
  While yet he learn'd his rudiments of war.
  His venturous spear first drew the hero's gore;
  He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.
  Nor, though disarm'd, Patroclus' fury stood:
  But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.
  And turn'd him short, and herded in the crowd.
  Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear,
  Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear,
  Retires for succour to his social train,
  And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.
  Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views,
  Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues:
  The lance arrests him with a mortal wound;
  He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
  With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all
  Her yet-surviving heroes seem'd to fall.
  So, scorch'd with heat, along the desert score,
  The roaming lion meets a bristly boar,
  Fast by the spring; they both dispute the, and vaunts in vain.
  But far the vainest of the boastful kind,
  These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind.
  Yet 'twas but late, beneath my conquering steel
  This boaster's brother, Hyperenor, fell;
  Against our arm which rashly he defied,
  Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride.
  These eyes beheld him on the dust expire,
  No more to cheer his spouse, or glad his sire.
  Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom,
  Go, wait thy brother to the Stygian gloom;
  Or, while thou may'st, avoid the threaten'd fate;
  Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late."

  Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: "That action known,
  Come, for my brother's blood repay thy own.
  His weeping father claims thy destined head,
  And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.
  On these thy conquer'd spoils I shall bestow,
  To soothe a consort's and a parent's woe.
  No longer then defer the glorious strife,
  Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life."

  Swift as the word the missile lance he flings;
  The well-aim'd weapon on the buckler rings,
  But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls.
  On Jove the father great Atrides calls,
  Nor flies the javelin from his arm in vain,
  It pierced his throat, and bent him to the plain;
  Wide through the neck appears the grisly wound,
  Prone sinks the warrior, and his arms resound.
  The shining circlets of his golden hair,
  Which even the Graces might be proud to wear,
  Instarr'd with gems and gold, bestrow the shore,
  With dust dishonour'd, and deform'd with gore.

  As the young olive, in some sylvan scene,
  Crown'd by fresh fountains with eternal green,
  Lifts the gay head, in snowy flowerets fair,
  And plays and dances to the gentle air;
  When lo! a whirlwind from high heaven invades
  The tender plant, and withers all its shades;
  It lies uprooted from its genial bed,
  A lovely ruin now defaced and dead:
  Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay,
  While the fierce Spartan tore his arms away.
  Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize,
  Affrighted Trd for glory, and his country's cause)
  Even yet our mutual arms we might employ,
  And drag yon carcase to the walls of Troy.
  Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain
  Sarpedon's arms and honour'd corse again!
  Greece with Achilles' friend should be repaid,
  And thus due honours purchased to his shade.
  But words are vain--Let Ajax once appear,
  And Hector trembles and recedes with fear;
  Thou dar'st not meet the terrors of his eye;
  And lo! already thou prepar'st to fly."

  The Trojan chief with fix'd resentment eyed
  The Lycian leader, and sedate replied:

  "Say, is it just, my friend, that Hector's ear
  From such a warrior such a speech should hear?
  I deem'd thee once the wisest of thy kind,
  But ill this insult suits a prudent mind.
  I shun great Ajax? I desert my train?
  'Tis mine to prove the rash assertion vain;
  I joy to mingle where the battle bleeds,
  And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds.
  But Jove's high will is ever uncontroll'd,
  The strong he withers, and confounds the bold;
  Now crowns with fame the mighty man, and now
  Strikes the fresh garland from the victor's brow!
  Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way,
  And thou be witness, if I fear to-day;
  If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread,
  Or yet their hero dare defend the dead."

  Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries:
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies!
  Be men, my friends, in action as in name,
  And yet be mindful of your ancient fame.
  Hector in proud Achilles' arms shall shine,
  Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine."

  He strode along the field, as thus he said:
  (The sable plumage nodded o'er his head:)
  Swift through the spacious plain he sent a look;
  One instant saw, one instant overtook
  The distant band, that on the sandy shore
  The radiant spoils to sacred Ilion bore.
  There his own mail unbraced the field bestrow'd;
  His train to Troy convey'd the massy load.
  Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands;
  The work and present of celestial yield; the Trojans seize the slain.
  Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on
  By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon.
  (Ajax to Peleus' son the second name,
  In graceful stature next, and next in fame)
  With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore;
  So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar,
  And rudely scatters, for a distance round,
  The frighted hunter and the baying hound.
  The son of Lethus, brave Pelasgus' heir,
  Hippothous, dragg'd the carcase through the war;
  The sinewy ankles bored, the feet he bound
  With thongs inserted through the double wound:
  Inevitable fate o'ertakes the deed;
  Doom'd by great Ajax' vengeful lance to bleed:
  It cleft the helmet's brazen cheeks in twain;
  The shatter'd crest and horse-hair strow the plain:
  With nerves relax'd he tumbles to the ground:
  The brain comes gushing through the ghastly wound:
  He drops Patroclus' foot, and o'er him spread,
  Now lies a sad companion of the dead:
  Far from Larissa lies, his native air,
  And ill requites his parents' tender care.
  Lamented youth! in life's first bloom he fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

  Once more at Ajax Hector's javelin flies;
  The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies,
  Shunn'd the descending death; which hissing on,
  Stretch'd in the dust the great Iphytus' son,
  Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian kind
  The boldest warrior and the noblest mind:
  In little Panope, for strength renown'd,
  He held his seat, and ruled the realms around.
  Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood,
  And deep transpiercing through the shoulder stood;
  In clanging arms the hero fell and all
  The fields resounded with his weighty fall.

  Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends,
  The Telamonian lance his belly rends;
  The hollow armour burst before the stroke,
  And through the wound the rushing entrails broke:
  In strong convulsions panting on the sands
  He lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands.

  Struck at the sight, recede the Trojan train:
  The shoutnguid head:
  Nor Jove disdain'd to cast a pitying look,
  While thus relenting to the steeds he spoke:

  "Unhappy coursers of immortal strain,
  Exempt from age, and deathless, now in vain;
  Did we your race on mortal man bestow,
  Only, alas! to share in mortal woe?
  For ah! what is there of inferior birth,
  That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth;
  What wretched creature of what wretched kind,
  Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
  A miserable race! but cease to mourn:
  For not by you shall Priam's son be borne
  High on the splendid car: one glorious prize
  He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.
  Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart,
  Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
  Automedon your rapid flight shall bear
  Safe to the navy through the storm of war.
  For yet 'tis given to Troy to ravage o'er
  The field, and spread her slaughters to the shore;
  The sun shall see her conquer, till his fall
  With sacred darkness shades the face of all."

  He said; and breathing in the immortal horse
  Excessive spirit, urged them to the course;
  From their high manes they shake the dust, and bear
  The kindling chariot through the parted war:
  So flies a vulture through the clamorous train
  Of geese, that scream, and scatter round the plain.
  From danger now with swiftest speed they flew,
  And now to conquest with like speed pursue;
  Sole in the seat the charioteer remains,
  Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins:
  Him brave Alcimedon beheld distress'd,
  Approach'd the chariot, and the chief address'd:

  "What god provokes thee rashly thus to dare,
  Alone, unaided, in the thickest war?
  Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector wields
  Achilles' arms triumphant in the fields."

  "In happy time (the charioteer rep Atrides flew,
  And sent his soul with every lance he threw.

  There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame,
  Aetion's son, and Podes was his name:
  With riches honour'd, and with courage bless'd,
  By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest;
  Through his broad belt the spear a passage found,
  And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.
  Sudden at Hector's side Apollo stood,
  Like Phaenops, Asius' son, appear'd the god;
  (Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign
  In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.)

  "Oh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!
  What Grecian now shall tremble at thy name?
  Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield,
  A chief once thought no terror of the field?
  Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize
  He bears victorious, while our army flies:
  By the same arm illustrious Podes bled;
  The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!"
  This heard, o'er Hector spreads a cloud of woe,
  Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe.

  But now the Eternal shook his sable shield,
  That shaded Ide and all the subject field
  Beneath its ample verge. A rolling cloud
  Involved the mount; the thunder roar'd aloud;
  The affrighted hills from their foundae, and with hunger bold,
  Long gall'd by herdsmen, and long vex'd by hounds,
  Stiff with fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds;
  The darts fly round him from a hundred hands,
  And the red terrors of the blazing brands:
  Till late, reluctant, at the dawn of day
  Sour he departs, and quits the untasted prey,
  So moved Atrides from his dangerous place
  With weary limbs, but with unwilling pace;
  The foe, he fear'd, might yet Patroclus gain,
  And much admonish'd, much adjured his train:

  "O guard these relics to your charge consign'd,
  And bear the merits of the dead in mind;
  How skill'd he was in each obliging art;
  The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart:
  He was, alas! but fate decreed his end,
  In death a hero, as in life a friend!"

  So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew,
  And round on all sides sent his piercing view.
  As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye
  Of all that wings the mid aerial sky,
  The sacred eagle, from his walks above
  Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move;
  Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare,
  Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.
  Not with less quickness, his exerted sight
  Pass'd this and that way, through the ranks of fight:
  Till on the left the chief he sought, he found,
  Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around:

  To him the king: "Beloved of Jove! draw near,
  For sadder tidings never touch'd thy ear;
  Thy eyes have witness'd what a fatal turn!
  How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn.
  This is not all: Patroclus, on the shore
  Now pale and dead, shall succour Greece no more.
  Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and tell
  The sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell:
  He too may haste the naked corse to gain:
  The arms are Hector's, who despoil'd the slain."

  The youthful warrior heard with silent woe,
  From his fair eyes the tears began to flow:
  Big with the mighty grief, he strove to say
  What sorrow dictates, but no word found way.
  To brave Laodocus his arms he flung,
  Who, near hit through all the chief,
  And wrapp'd his senses in the cloud of grief;
  Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread
  The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head;
  His purple garments, and his golden hairs,
  Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears;
  On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw,
  And roll'd and grovell'd, as to earth he grew.
  The virgin captives, with disorder'd charms,
  (Won by his own, or by Patroclus' arms,)
  Rush'd from their tents with cries; and gathering round,
  Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the ground:
  While Nestor's son sustains a manlier part,
  And mourns the warrior with a warrior's heart;
  Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe,
  And oft prevents the meditated blow.

  Far in the deep abysses of the main,(251)
  With hoary Nereus, and the watery train,
  The mother-goddess from her crystal throne
  Heard his loud cries, and answer'd groan for groan.
  The circling Nereids with their mistress weep,
  And all the sea-green sisters of the deep.
  Thalia, Glauce (every watery name),
  Nesaea mild, and silver Spio came:
  Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,
  And the blue languish of soft Alia's eye.
  Their locks Actaea and Limnoria rear,
  Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear,
  Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita;
  Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay:
  Next Callianira, Callianassa show
  Their sister looks; Dexamene the slow,
  And swift Dynamene, now cut the tides:
  Iaera now the verdant wave divides:
  Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the head,
  Bright Galatea quits her pearly bed;
  These Orythia, Clymene, attend,
  Maera, Amphinome, the train extend;
  And black Janira, and Janassa fair,
  And Amatheia with her amber hair.
  All these, and all that deep in ocean held
  Their sacred seats, the glimmering grotto fill'd;
  Each beat her ivory breast with silent woe,
  Till Thetis' sorrows thus began to flow:

  "Hear me, and judge, ye sisters of the main!
  How just a cause has Thetis to complain!
  How wretched, were I mortal, were my fate!
  How morath the wave:
  Thetis once more ascends the bless'd abodes,
  And treads the brazen threshold of the gods.

   [Illustration: THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.]

           THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.


  And now the Greeks from furious Hector's force,
  Urge to broad Hellespont their headlong course;
  Nor yet their chiefs Patroclus' body bore
  Safe through the tempest to the tented shore.
  The horse, the foot, with equal fury join'd,
  Pour'd on the rear, and thunder'd close behind:
  And like a flame through fields of ripen'd corn,
  The rage of Hector o'er the ranks was borne.
  Thrice the slain hero by the foot he drew;
  Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew:
  As oft the Ajaces his assault sustain;
  But check'd, he turns; repuls'd, attacks again.
  With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires,
  Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires:
  So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain,
  The hungry lion from a carcase slain.
  Even yet wn shout Minerva swells the sound;
  Troy starts astonish'd, and the shores rebound.
  As the loud trumpet's brazen mouth from far
  With shrilling clangour sounds the alarm of war,
  Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high,
  And the round bulwarks and thick towers reply;
  So high his brazen voice the hero rear'd:
  Hosts dropp'd their arms, and trembled as they heard:
  And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound,
  And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
  Aghast they see the living lightnings play,
  And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
  Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised,
  And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
  Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rush'd
  On their own spears, by their own chariots crush'd:
  While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain
  The long-contended carcase of the slain.

  A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears:
  Around, his sad companions melt in tears.
  But chief Achilles, bending down his head,
  Pours unavailing sorrows o'er the dead,
  Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car,
  He sent refulgent to the field of war;
  (Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found,
  Stretch'd forth, and gash'd with many a gaping wound.

  Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way,
  In ocean's waves the unwilling light of day
  Quench'd his red orb, at Juno's high command,
  And from their labours eased the Achaian band.
  The frighted Trojans (panting from the war,
  Their steeds unharness'd from the weary car)
  A sudden council call'd: each chief appear'd
  In haste, and standing; for to sit they fear'd.
  'Twas now no season for prolong'd debate;
  They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.
  Silent they stood: Polydamas at last,
  Skill'd to discern the future by the past,
  The son of Panthus, thus express'd his fears
  (The friend of Hector, and of equal years;
  The self-same night to both a being gave,
  One wise in council, one in action brave):

             [Illustration: JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO  above,
  (His wife and sister,) spoke almighty Jove.
  "At last thy will prevails: great Peleus' son
  Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won.
  Say (for I know not), is their race divine,
  And thou the mother of that martial line?"

  "What words are these? (the imperial dame replies,
  While anger flash'd from her majestic eyes)
  Succour like this a mortal arm might lend,
  And such success mere human wit attend:
  And shall not I, the second power above,
  Heaven's queen, and consort of the thundering Jove,
  Say, shall not I one nation's fate command,
  Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land?"

                         [Illustration: TRIPOD.]

                                 TRIPOD.


  So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dame
  Reach'd the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
  High-eminent amid the works divine,
  Where heaven's far-beaming brazen mansions shine.
  There the lame architect the goddess found,
  Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round,
  While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew;
  And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.
  That day no common task his labour claim'd:
  Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed,
  That placed on living wheels of massy gold,
  (Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit roll'd
  From place to place, around the bless'd abodes
  Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods:
  For their fair handles now, o'erwrought with flowers,
  In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours.
  Just as responsive to his thought the frame
  Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came:
  Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair,
  (With purple fillets round her braided hair,)
  Observed her entering; her soft hand she press'd,
  And, smiling, thus the watery queen address'd:

  "What, goddess! this unusual favour draws?
  All hail, and welcome! whatsoe'er the cause;
  Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
  Approach, and taste the dainties of the bower."

     [Illustration: THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.]

             THETIS AND EURYN place,(254)
  The reverend elders nodded o'er the case;
  Alternate, each the attesting sceptre took,
  And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke
  Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight,
  The prize of him who best adjudged the right.

  Another part (a prospect differing far)(255)
  Glow'd with refulgent arms, and horrid war.
  Two mighty hosts a leaguer'd town embrace,
  And one would pillage, one would burn the place.
  Meantime the townsmen, arm'd with silent care,
  A secret ambush on the foe prepare:
  Their wives, their children, and the watchful band
  Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand.
  They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold:
  Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold,
  And gold their armour: these the squadron led,
  August, divine, superior by the head!
  A place for ambush fit they found, and stood,
  Cover'd with shields, beside a silver flood.
  Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem
  If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.
  Soon the white flocks proceeded o'er the plains,
  And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains;
  Behind them piping on their reeds they go,
  Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe.
  In arms the glittering squadron rising round
  Rush sudden; hills of slaughter heap the ground;
  Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the plains,
  And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains!
  The bellowing oxen the besiegers hear;
  They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war,
  They fight, they fall, beside the silver flood;
  The waving silver seem'd to blush with blood.
  There Tumult, there Contention stood confess'd;
  One rear'd a dagger at a captive's breast;
  One held a living foe, that freshly bled
  With new-made wounds; another dragg'd a dead;
  Now here, now there, the carcases they tore:
  Fate stalk'd amidst them, grim with human gore.
  And the whole war came out, and met the eye;
  And each bold figure seem'd to live or die.

  A field deep furrow'd next the god design'd,(256)
  The third time labour'd by the swehat gave the blow;
  Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestow'd,
  Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a god."

  Then drops the radiant burden on the ground;
  Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around;
  Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise,
  And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes.
  Unmoved the hero kindles at the show,
  And feels with rage divine his bosom glow;
  From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,
  And flash incessant like a stream of fire:
  He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind
  On all the immortal artist had design'd.

  "Goddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine
  With matchless art, confess the hand divine.
  Now to the bloody battle let me bend:
  But ah! the relics of my slaughter'd friend!
  In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled,
  Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?"

  "That unavailing care be laid aside,
  (The azure goddess to her son replied,)
  Whole years untouch'd, uninjured shall remain,
  Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.
  But go, Achilles, as affairs require,
  Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire:
  Then uncontna's coming labours stay,
  And stop the babe, just issuing to the day.
  Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind;
  'A youth (said she) of Jove's immortal kind
  Is this day born: from Sthenelus he springs,
  And claims thy promise to be king of kings.'
  Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath engaged;
  Stung to the soul, he sorrow'd, and he raged.
  From his ambrosial head, where perch'd she sate,
  He snatch'd the fury-goddess of debate,
  The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore,
  The immortal seats should ne'er behold her more;
  And whirl'd her headlong down, for ever driven
  From bright Olympus and the starry heaven:
  Thence on the nether world the fury fell;
  Ordain'd with man's contentious race to dwell.
  Full oft the god his son's hard toils bemoan'd,
  Cursed the dire fury, and in secret groan'd.(258)
  Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled,
  While raging Hector heap'd our camps with dead.
  What can the errors of my rage atone?
  My martial troops, my treasures are thy own:
  This instant from the navy shall be sent
  Whate'er Ulysses promised at thy tent:
  But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer,
  Resume thy arms, and shine again in war."

  " O king of nations! whose superior sway
  (Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!
  To keep or send the presents, be thy care;
  To us, 'tis equal: all we ask is war.
  While yet we talk, or but an instant shun
  The fight, our glorious work remains undone.
  Let every Greek, who sees my spear confound
  The Trojan ranks, and deal destruction round,
  With emulation, what I act survey,
  And learn from thence the business of the day.

  The son of Peleus thus; and thus replies
  The great in councils, Ithacus the wise:
  "Though, godlike, thou art by no toils oppress'd,
  Am the royal tent:
  The sons of Nestor, Phyleus' valiant heir,
  Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war,
  With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain,
  And Melanippus, form'd the chosen train.
  Swift as the word was given, the youths obey'd:
  Twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid;
  A row of six fair tripods then succeeds;
  And twice the number of high-bounding steeds:
  Seven captives next a lovely line compose;
  The eighth Briseis, like the blooming rose,
  Closed the bright band: great Ithacus, before,
  First of the train, the golden talents bore:
  The rest in public view the chiefs dispose,
  A splendid scene! then Agamemnon rose:
  The boar Talthybius held: the Grecian lord
 my sorrows for a husband slain;
  Achilles' care you promised I should prove,
  The first, the dearest partner of his love;
  That rites divine should ratify the band,
  And make me empress in his native land.
  Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow,
  For thee, that ever felt another's woe!"

  Her sister captives echoed groan for groan,
  Nor mourn'd Patroclus' fortunes, but their own.
  The leaders press'd the chief on every side;
  Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied.

  "If yet Achilles have a friend, whose care
  Is bent to please him, this request forbear;
  Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay
  To grief and anguish one abstemious day."

  He spoke, and from the warriors turn'd his face:
  Yet still the brother-kings of Atreus' race,
  Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,
  And Phoenix, strive to calm his grief and rage:
  His rage they calm not, nor his grief control;
  He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul.

  "Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents)
  Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents:
  Thy sweet society, thy winning care,
  Once stay'd Achilles, rushing to the war.
  But now, alas! to death's cold arms resign'd,
  What banquet but revenge can glad my mind?
  What greater sorrow could afflict my breast,
  What more if hoary Peleus were deceased?
  Who now, perhaps, in Phthia dreads to hear
  His son's sad fate, and drops a tender tear.
  What more, should Neoptolemus the brave,
  My only offspring, sink into the grave?
  If yet that offspring lives; (I distant far,
  Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.)
  I could not this, this cruel stroke attend;
  Fate claim'd Achilles, but might spare his friend.
  I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear
  My tender orphan with a parent's care,
  From Scyros' isle conduct him o'er the main,
  And glad his eyes with his paternal reign,
  The lofty palace, and the large domain.
  For Peleus breathes no more the v prodigies are lost on me.
  I know my fate: to die, to see no more
  My much-loved parents, and my native shore--
  Enough--when heaven ordains, I sink in night:
  Now perish Troy!" He said, and rush'd to fight.

                        [Illustration: HERCULES.]

                                HERCULES.





BOOK XX.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES.

Jupiter, upon Achilles' return to the battle, calls a council of the gods,
and permits them to assist either party. The terrors of the combat
described, when the deities are engaged. Apollo encourages Ä†neas to meet
Achilles. After a long conversation, these two heroes encounter; but Ä†neas
is preserved by the assistance of Neptune. Achilles falls upon the rest of
the Trojans, and is upon the point of killing Hector, but Apollo conveys
him away in a cloud. Achilles pursues the Trojans with a great slaughter.

The same day continues. The scene is in the field before Troy.

  Thus round Pelides breathing war and blood
  Greece, sheathed in arms, beside her vessels stood;
  While near impending from a neighbouring height,
  Troy's black battalions wait the shock of fight.
  Then Jove to Themis gives command, to call
  The gods to council in the starry hall:
  Swift o'er Olympus' hundred hills she flies,
  And summons all the senate of the skies.
  These shining on, in long procession come
  To Jove's eternal adamantine dome.
  Not one was absent, not a rural power
  That haunts the verdant gloom, or rosy bower;
  Each fair-hair'd dryad of the shady wood,
  Each azure sister of the silver flood;
  All but old Ocean, hoary sire! who keeps
  His ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps.
  On marble thrones, with lucid columns crown'd,
  (The work of Vulcan,) sat the powers around.
  Even he whose trident sways the watery reign
  Heard the loud summons, and forsook the main,
  Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes,
  And question'd thus the sire of men and gods:

  "What moves the god who heaven and earth commands,
  And grasps tthe dreadful plain,
  And suffer not his dart to fall in vain.
  Were God my aid, this arm should check his power,
  Though strong in battle as a brazen tower."

  To whom the son of Jove: "That god implore,
  And be what great Achilles was before.
  From heavenly Venus thou deriv'st thy strain,
  And he but from a sister of the main;
  An aged sea-god father of his line;
  But Jove himself the sacred source of thine.
  Then lift thy weapon for a noble blow,
  Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe."

  This said, and spirit breathed into his breast,
  Through the thick troops the embolden'd hero press'd:
  His venturous act the white-arm'd queen survey'd,
  And thus, assembling all the powers, she said:

  "Behold an action, gods! that claims your care,
  Lo great Ä†neas rushing to the war!
  Against Pelides he directs his course,
  Phoebus impels, and Phoebus gives him force.
  Restrain his bold career; at least, to attend
  Our favour'd hero, let some power descend.
  To guard his life, and add to his renown,
  We, the great armament of heaven, came down.
  Hereafter let him fall, as Fates design,
  That spun so short his life's illustrious line:(262)
  But lest some adverse god now cross his way,
  Give him to know what powers assist this day:
  For how shall mortal stand the dire alarms,
  When heaven's refulgent host appear in arms?"(263)

  Thus she; and thus the god whose force can make
  The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
  "Against the might of man, so feeble known,
  Why should celestial powers exert their own?
  Suffice from yonder mount to view the scene,
  And leave to war the fates of mortal men.
  But if the armipotent, or god of light,
  Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight.
  Thence on the gods of Troy we swift descend:
  Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end;
  And these, in ruin and confusion hurl'd,
  Yield to our conquering arms the lower world."

  Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea,
  Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way.
  Advanced upon the field therewith boundless sway,
  All human courage gives, or takes away.
  Long in the field of words we may contend,
  Reproach is infinite, and knows no end,
  Arm'd or with truth or falsehood, right or wrong;
  So voluble a weapon is the tongue;
  Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail,
  For every man has equal strength to rail:
  Women alone, when in the streets they jar,
  Perhaps excel us in this wordy war;
  Like us they stand, encompass'd with the crowd,
  And vent their anger impotent and loud.
  Cease then--Our business in the field of fight
  Is not to question, but to prove our might.
  To all those insults thou hast offer'd here,
  Receive this answer: 'tis my flying spear."

  He spoke. With all his force the javelin flung,
  Fix'd deep, and loudly in the buckler rung.
  Far on his outstretch'd arm, Pelides held
  (To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful shield,
  That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fear
  Saw, ere it fell, the immeasurable spear.
  His fears were vain; impenetrable charms
  Secured the temper of the ethereal arms.
  Throe force, or acting fire;
  Whate'er this heart can prompt, or hand obey;
  All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.
  Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear,
  And thin the squadrons with my single spear."

  He said: nor less elate with martial joy,
  The godlike Hrice of rashness paid.
  The impatient steel with full-descending sway
  Forced through his brazen helm its furious way,
  Resistless drove the batter'd skull before,
  And dash'd and mingled all the brains with gore.
  This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright,
  Deserts his chariot for a swifter flight:
  The lance arrests him: an ignoble wound
  The panting Trojan rivets to the ground.
  He groans away his soul: not louder roars,
  At Neptune's shrine on Helice's high shores,
  The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round,
  And ocean listens to the grateful sound.
  Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,(268)
  The youngest hope of Priam's stooping age:
  (Whose feet for swiftness in the race surpass'd:)
  Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last.
  To the forbidden field he takes his flight,
  In the first folly of a youthful knight,
  To vaunt his swiftness wheels around the plain,
  But vaunts not long, with all his swiftness slain:
  Struck where the crossing belts unite behind,
  And golden rings the double back-plate join'd
  Forth through the navel burst the thrilling steel;
  And on his knees with piercing shrieks he fell;
  The rushing entrails pour'd upon the ground
  His hands collect; and darkness wraps him round.
  When Hector view'd, all ghastly in his gore,
  Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore,
  A cloud of sorrow overcast his sight,
  His soul no longer brook'd the distant fight:
  Full in Achilles' dreadful front he came,
  And shook his javelin like a waving flame.
  The son of Peleus sees, with joy possess'd,
  His heart high-bounding in his rising breast.
  "And, lo! the man on whom black fates attend;
  The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend!
  No more shall Hector's and Pelides' spear
  Turn from each other in the walks of war."--
  Then with revengeful eyes he scann'd him o'er:
  "Come, and receive thy fate!" He spake no more.

  Hector, undaunted, thus: "Such words employ
  To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike boy:
  Such we could give, defying and defied,
  y drove,
  Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove.
  The river here divides the flying train,
  Part to the town fly diverse o'er the plain,
  Where late their troops triumphant bore the fight,
  Now chased, and trembling in ignoble flight:
  (These with a gathered mist Saturnia shrouds,
  And rolls behind the rout a heap of clouds:)
  Part plunge into the stream: old Xanthus roars,
  The flashing billows beat the whiten'd shores:
  With cries promiscuous all the banks resound,
  And here, and there, in eddies whirling round,
  The flouncing steeds and shrieking warriors drown'd.
  As the scorch'd locusts from their fields retire,
  While fast behind them runs the blaze of fire;
  Driven from the land before the smoky cloud,
  The clustering legions rush into the flood:
  So, plunged in Xanthus by Achilles' force,
  Roars the resounding surge with men and horse.
  His bloody lance the hero casts aside,
  (Which spreading tamarisks on the margin hide,)
  Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves,
  Arm'd with his sword, high brandish'd o'er the waves:
  Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round,
  Deep groan'd the waters with the dying sound;
  Repeated wounds the reddening river dyed,
  And the warm purple circled on the tide.
  Swift through the foamy flood the Trojans fly,
  And close in rocks or winding caverns lie:
  So the huge dolphin tempesting the main,
  In shoals before him fly the scaly train,
  Confusedly heap'd they seek their inmost caves,
  Or pant and heave beneath the floating waves.
  Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band
  Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land;
  With their rich belts their captive arms restrains
  (Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).
  These his attendants to the ships convey'd,
  Sad victims destined to Patroclus' shade;

  Then, as once more he plunged amid the flood,
  The young Lycaon in his passage stood;
  The son of Priam; whom the hero's hand
  But late made captive in his father's land
  (As from a sycamore, his sounding steel
e? Unhappy is the sire
  Whose son encounters our resistless ire."

  "O son of Peleus! what avails to trace
  (Replied the warrior) our illustrious race?
  From rich Paeonia's valleys I command,
  Arm'd with protended spears, my native band;
  Now shines the tenth bright morning since I came
  In aid of Ilion to the fields of fame:
  Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floated region fills,
  Begot my sire, whose spear much glory won:
  Now lift thy arm, and try that hero's son!"

  Threatening he said: the hostile chiefs advance;
  At once Asteropeus discharged each lance,
  (For both his dexterous hands the lance could wield,)
  One struck, but pierced not, the Vulcanian shield;
  One razed Achilles' hand; the spouting blood
  Spun forth; in earth the fasten'd weapon stood.
  Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies:
  Its erring fury hiss'd along the skies;
  Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear,
  Even to the middle earth; and quiver'd there.
  Then from his side the sword Pelides drew,
  And on his foe with double fury flew.
  The foe thrice tugg'd, and shook the rooted wood;
  Repulsive of his might the weapon stood:
  The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain;
  Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain;
  His belly open'd with a ghastly wound,
  The reeking entrails pour upon the ground.
  Beneath the hero's feet he panting lies,
  And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies;
  While the proud victor thus triumphing said,
  His radiant armour tearing from the dead:

  "So ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove,
  Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove!
  Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line?
  But great Saturnius is the source of mine.
  How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny?
  Of Peleus, Ä†acus, and Jove, am I.
  The race of these superior far to those,
  As he that thunders to the stream that flows.
  What rivers can, Scamander might have shown;
  But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.
  Even Achelous might away,
  An unregarded carcase to the sea."

  Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief,
  And thus in human form address'd the chief:
  The power of ocean first: "Forbear thy fear,
  O son of Peleus! Lo, thy gods appear!
  Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid,
  Propitious Neptune, and the blue-eyed maid.
  Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave
  'Tis not thy fate to glut his angry wave.
  But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
  Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend,
  Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all
  Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall:
  Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance,
  And Hector's blood shall smoke upon thy lance.
  Thine is the glory doom'd." Thus spake the gods:
  Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.

  Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impell'd,
  He springs impetuous, and invades the field:
  O'er all the expanded plain the waters spread;
  Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead,
  Floating 'midst scatter'd arms; while casques of gold
  And turn'd-up bucklers glitter'd as they roll'eath,
  The eels lie twisting in the pangs of death:
  Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry,
  Or, gasping, turn their bellies to the sky.
  At length the river rear'd his languid head,
  And thus, short-panting, to the god he said:

  "Oh Vulcan! oh! what power resists thy might?
  I faint, I sink, unequal to the fight--
  I yield--Let Ilion fall; if fate decree--
  Ah--bend no more thy fiery arms on me!"

  He ceased; wide conflagration blazing round;
  The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.
  As when the flames beneath a cauldron rise,(272)
  To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice,
  Amid the fierce embrace of circling fires
  The waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires:
  So boils the imprison'd flood, forbid to flow,
  And choked with vapours feels his bottom glow.
  To Juno then, imperial queen of air,
  The burning river sends his earnest prayer:

  "Ah why, Saturnia; must thy son engage
  Me, only me, with all his wasteful rage?
  On other gods his dreadful arm employ,
  For mightier gods assert the cause of Troy.
  Submissive I desist, if thou command;
  But ah! withdraw this all-destroying hand.
  Hear then my solemn oath, to yield to fate
  Unaided Ilion, and her destined state,
  Till Greece shall gird her with destructive flame,
  And in one ruin sink the Trojan name."

  His warm entreaty touch'd Saturnia's ear:
  She bade the ignipotent his rage forbear,
  Recall the flame, nor in a mortal cause
  Infest a god: the obedient flame withdraws:
  Again the branching streams begin to spread,
  And soft remurmur in their wonted bed.

  While these by Juno's will the strife resign,
  The warring gods in fierce contention join:
 k'd, her right untied
  The bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride.
  About her temples flies the busy bow;
  Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow;
  The scattering arrows, rattling from the case,
  Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.
  Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies,
  And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes:
  So, when the falcon wings her way above,
  To the cleft cavern speeds the gentle dove;
  (Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats,
  Yet still her heart against the marble beats.

  To her Latona hastes with tender care;
  Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the war:
  "How shall I face the dame, who gives delight
  To him whose thunders blacken heaven with night?
  Go, matchless goddess! triumph in the skies,
  And boast my conquest, while I yield the prize."

  He spoke; and pass'd: Latona, stooping low,
  Collects the scatter'd shafts and fallen bow,
  That, glittering on the dust, lay here and there
  Dishonour'd relics of Diana's war:
  Then swift pursued her to her blest abode,
  Where, all confused, she sought the sovereign god;
  Weeping, she grasp'd his knees: the ambrosial vest
  Shook with her sighs, and panted on her breast.

  The sire superior smiled, and bade her show
  What heavenly hand had caused his daughter's woe?
  Abash'd, she names his own imperial spouse;
  And the pale crescent fades upon her brows.

  Thun vain to fly,
  And such his valour, that who stands must die.
  Howe'er 'tis better, fighting for the state,
  Here, and in public view, to meet my fate.
  Yet sure he too is mortal; he may feel
  (Like all the sons of earth) the force of steel.
  One only soul informs that dreadful frame:
  And Jove's sole favour gives him all his fame."

  He said, and stood, collected, in his might;
  And all his beating bosom claim'd the fight.
  So from some deep-grown wood a panther starts,
  Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts:
  Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the sounds
  Of shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds;
  Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain;
  And the barb'd javelin stings his breast in vain:
  On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies;
  And tears his hunter, or beneath him dies.
  Not less resolved, Antenor's valiant heir
  Confronts Achilles, and awaits the war,
  Disdainful of retreat: high held before,
  His shield (a broad circumference) he bore;
  Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw
  The lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe:

  "How proud Achilles glories in his fame!
  And hopes this day to sink the Trojan name
  Beneath her ruins! Know, that hope is vain;
  A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.
  Parents and children our just arms employ,
  And strong and many are the sons of Troy.
  Great as thou art, even thou may'st stain with gore
  These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore."

  He said: with matchless force the javelin flung
  Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung
  Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms
  He stands impassive in the ethereal arms.
  Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe,
  His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow:
  But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds
  The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds.
  Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view,
  Dismiss'd with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
  Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape,
  Assumes Agenor's habit, voice and shape,
  Flies from th!
  Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me,
  Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee.
  Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall;
  And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
  Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so brave
  Neglect that thought, thy dearer glory save.
  Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs;
  While yet thy father feels the woes he bears,
  Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage
  (All trembling on the verge of helpless age)
  Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
  The bitter dregs of fortune's cup to drain:
  To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes,
  And number all his days by miseries!
  My heroes slain, my bridal bed o'erturn'd,
  My daughters ravish'd, and my city burn'd,
  My bleeding infants dash'd against the floor;
  These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
  Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate,
  The last sad relic of my ruin'd state,
  (Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall,
  And stain the pavement of my regal hall;
  Where famish'd dogs, late guardians of my door,
  Shall lick their mangled master's spatter'd gore.
  Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! 'tis well;
  Well have they perish'd, for in fight they fell.
  Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best,
  Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast.
  But when the fates, in fulness of their rage,
  Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age,
  In dust the reverend lineaments deform,
  And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm:
  This, this is misery! the last, the worse,
  That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!"

  He said, and acting what no words could say,
  Rent from his head the silver locks away.
  With him the mournful mother bears a part;
  Yet all her sorrows turn not Hector's heart.
  The zone unbraced, her bosom she display'd;
  And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said:

  "Have mercy on me, O my son! revere
  The words of age; attend a parent's prayer!
  If ever thee in these fond arms I press'd,
  Or still'd thy infant clamours at this se they look,
  The sire of mortals and immortals spoke:

  "Unworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven,
  Behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
  My heart partakes the generous Hector's pain;
  Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain,
  Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy,
  From Ida's summits, and the towers of Troy:
  Now see him flying; to his fears resign'd,
  And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
  Consult, ye powers! ('tis worthy your debate)
  Whether to snatch him from impending fate,
  Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
  (Good as he is) the lot imposed on man."

  Then Pallas thus: va flies
  To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries:
  "O loved of Jove! this day our labours cease,
  And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.
  Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far,
  Drunk with renown, insatiable of war,
  Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight,
  Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
  See, where in vain he supplicates above,
  Roll'd at the feet of unrelenting Jove;
  Rest here: myself will lead the Trojan on,
  And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun."

  Her voice divine the chief with joyful mind
  Obey'd; and rested, on his lance reclined
  While like Deiphobus the martial dame
  (Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same),
  In show an aid, by hapless Hector's side
  Approach'd, and greets him thus with voice belied:

  "Too long, O Hector! have I borne the sight
  Of this distress, and sorrow'd in thy flight:
  It fits us now a noble stand to make,
  And here, as brothers, equal fates partake."

  Then he: "O prince! allied in blood and fame,
  Dearer than all that own a brother's name;
  Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,
  Long tried, long loved: much lo the air,
  Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare.
  Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares:
  Before his breast the flaming shield he bears,
  Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone
  The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun.
  Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!)
  And as he moved, his figure seem'd on flame.
  As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,(277)
  Far-beaming o'er the silver host of night,
  When all the starry train emblaze the sphere:
  So shone the point of great Achilles' spear.
  In his right hand he waves the weapon round,
  Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound;
  But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore
  Securely cased the warrior's body o'er.
  One space at length he spies, to let in fate,
  Where 'twixt the neck and throat the jointed plate
  Gave entrance: through that penetrable part
  Furious he drove the well-directed dart:
  Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power
  Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour.
  Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies,
  While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries:

  "At last is Hector stretch'd upon the plain,
  Who fear'd no vengeance for Patroclus slain:
  Then, prince! you should have fear'd, what now you feel;
  Achilles absent was Achilles still:
  Yet a short space the great avenger stayed,
  Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.
  Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adorn'd,
  For ever honour'd, and for ever mourn'd:
  While cast to all the rage of hostile power,
  Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour."

  Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death:
  "By thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath!
  By all the sacred prevalence of prayer;
  Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!
  The common rites of sepulture bestow,
  To soothe a father's and a mother's woe:
  Let their large gifts procure an urn at least,
  And Hector's ashes in his country rest."

  "No, wretch accursed! relentless he replies;
  (Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;)
  Not thos(Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace
  Begot this pest of me, and all my race).
  How many valiant sons, in early bloom,
  Has that cursed hand send headlong to the tomb!
  Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave)
  Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
  O had thy gentle spirit pass'd in peace,
  The son expiring in the sire's embrace,
  While both thy parents wept the fatal hour,
  And, bending o'er thee, mix'd the tender shower!
  Some comfort that had been, some sad relief,
  To melt in full satiety of grief!"

  Thus wail'd the father, grovelling on the ground,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream'd around.

  Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:
  (A mourning princess, and a train in tears;)
  "Ah why has Heaven prolong'd this hated breath,
  Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
  O Hector! late thy parents' pride and joy,
  The boast of nations! the defence of Troy!
  To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
  Her chief, her hero, and almost her god!
  O fatal change! become in one sad day
  A senseless corse! inanimated clay!"

  But not as yet the fatal news had spread
  To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
  As yet no messenger had told his fate,
  Not e'en his stay without the Scaean gate.
  Far in the close recesses of the dome,
  Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
  A growing work employ'd her secret hours,
  Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
  Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn,
  The bath preparing for her lord's return
  In vain; alas! her lord returns no more;
  Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
  Now from the walls the clamours reach her ear,
  And all her members sbled in the dust, the pensive train
  Through the sad city mourn'd her hero slain.
  The body soil'd with dust, and black with gore,
  Lies on broad Hellespont's resounding shore.
  The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand,
  All, but the martial Myrmidonian band:
  These yet assembled great Achilles holds,
  And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds:

  "Not yet, my brave companions of the war,
  Release your smoking coursers from the car;
  But, with his chariot each in order led,
  Perform due honours to Patroclus dead.
  Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief,
  Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief."

  The troops obey'd; and thrice in order led(281)
  (Achilles first) their coursers round the dead;
  And thrice their sorrows and laments renew;
  Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.
  For such a warrior Thetis aids their woe,
  Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow.
  But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs
  Burst frtial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
  Along the grass his languid members fall,
  Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall;
  Hush'd by the murmueeble, lamentable cry.
  Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands
  Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands,
  Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:

  "'Tis true, 'tis certain; man, though dead, retains
  Part of himself; the immortal mind remains:
  The form subsists without the body's aid,
  Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
  This night my friend, so late in battle lost,
  Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost:
  Even now familiar, as in life, he came;
  Alas! how different! yet how like the same!"

  Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:
  And now the rosy-finger'd morn appears,
  Shows every mournful face with tears o'erspread,
  And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
  But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,
  With mules and waggons sends a chosen band
  To load the timber, and the pile to rear;
  A charge consign'd to Merion's faithful care.
  With proper instruments they take the road,
  Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
  First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
  O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks they go:(285)
  Jumping, high o'er the shrubs of the rough ground,
  Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock'd axles bound
  But when arrived at Ida's spreading woods,(286)
  (Fair Ida, water'd with descending floods,)
  Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
  On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
  Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;
  Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
  The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
  And thle your blast be driven,
  And bear the blazing honours high to heaven."

  Swift as the word she vanish'd from their view;
  Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew;
  Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar,
  And heaps on heaps the clouds are toss'd before.
  To the wide main then stooping from the skies,
  The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise:
  Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls,
  Till on the pile the gather'd tempest falls.
  The structure crackles in the roaring fires,
  And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
  All night Achilles hails Patroclus' soul,
  With large libations from the golden bowl.
  As a poor father, helpless and undone,
  Mourns o'er the ashes of an only son,
  Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn,
  And pours in tears, ere yet they close the urn:
  So stay'd Achilles, circling round the shore,
  So watch'd the flames, till now they flame no more.
  'Twas when, emerging through the shades of night.
  The morning planet told the approach of light;
  And, fast behind, Aurora's warmer ray
  O'er the broad ocean pour'd the golden day:
  Then sank the blaze, the pile no longer burn'd,
  And to their caves the whistling winds return'd:
  Across the Thracian seas their course they bore;
  The ruffled seas beneath their passage roar.

  Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep,
  And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep,
  Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd
  Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood;
  The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook
  Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke:

  "Ye kings and princes of the Achaian name!
  First let us quench the yet remaining flame
  With sable wine; then, as the rites direct,
  The hero's bones with careful view select:
  (Apart, and easy to be known they lie
  Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:
  The rest around the margin will be seen
  Promiscuous, steeds and immolated men:)
  These wrapp'd in double cauls of fat, prepare;
  And in the golden vase dispose with careught unsaid) the much-advising sage
  Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
  Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,
  The last, but not least ardent for the prize.
  They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose
  (Roll'd in his helmet, these Achilles throws).
  Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then;
  And next the brother of the king of men:
  Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast;
  And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
  They stand in order, an impatient train:
ish'd wound:
  Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes:
  Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
  Minerva's spirit drives his matchless pace,
  And crowns him victor of the labour'd race.

  The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds;
  While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:
  "Now, now, my generous pair, exert your force;
  Not that we hope to match Tydides' horse,
  Since great Minerva wings their rapid way,
  And gives their lord the honours of the day;
  But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo
  Your swiftness? vanquish'd by a female foe?
  Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain
  The last ignoble gift be all we gain,
  No more shall Nestor's hand your food supply,
  The old man's fury rises, and ye die.
  Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight,
  Presents the occasion, coul shining white,
  Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight.
  He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun:
  "Are yonder horse discern'd by me alone?
  Or can ye, all, another chief survey,
  And other steeds than lately led the way?
  Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld,
  Lie sure disabled in the middle field:
  For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain
  I search to find them, but I search in vain.
  Perchance the reins forsook the driver's hand,
  And, turn'd too short, he tumbled on the strand,
  Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray
  With frantic fury from the destined way.
  Rise then some other, and inform my sight,
  For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right;
  Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air,
  The great Ä†tolian chief, renown'd in war."

  "Old man! (Oileus rashly thus replies)
  Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize;
  Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,
  Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
  Eumelus' steeds, high bounding in the chase,
  Still, as at first, unrivall'd lead the race:
  I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,
  And hear his shouts victorious o'er the plain."

  Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin'd:
  "Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
  Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside
  The last in merit, as the first in pride!
  To vile reproach what answer can we make?
  A goblet or a tripod let us stake,
  And be the king the judge. The most unwise
  Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price."

  He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne,
  Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn
  To fell extremes. But Thetis' godlike son
  Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun:

  "Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to  ah! how few, who should like thee offend,
  Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
  To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone,
  Suffice thy father's merit and thy own:
  Generous alike, for me, the sire and son
  Have greatly suffer'd, and have greatly done.
  I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend,
  Nor is my pride preferr'd before my friend."

  He said; and pleased his passion to command,
  Resign'd the courser to Noemon's hand,
  Friend of the youthful chief hand,
  And backward hurl'd Ancaeus on the sand,
  Surpass'd Iphyclus in the swift career,
  Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear.
  The sons of Actor won the prize of horse,
  But won by numbers, not by art or force:
  For the famed twins, impatient to survey
  Prize after prize by Nestor borne away,
  Sprung to their car; and with united pains
  One lash'd the coursers, while one ruled the reins.
  Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeeds
  A younger race, that emulate our deeds:
  I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?)
  Though once the foremost hero of the field.
  Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led,
  With martial honours decorate the dead:
  While pleased I take the gift thy hands present,
  (Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,)
  Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
  Not one but honours sacred age and mthe blows,
  And painful sweat from all their members flows.
  At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow
  Full on the cheek of his unwary foe;
  Beneath that ponderous arm's resistless sway
  Down dropp'd he, nerveless, and extended lay.
  As a large fish, when winds and waters roar,
  By some huge billow dash'd against the shore,
  Lies panting; not less batter'd with his wound,
  The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
  To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends,
  Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends;
  Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,
  And dragging his disabled legs along;
  Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o'er;
  His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;(292)
  Wrapp'd round in mists he lies, and lost to thought;
  His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.

  The third bold game Achilles next demands,
  And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:
  A massy tripod for the victor lies,
  Of twice six oxen its reputed price;
  And next, the loser's spirits to restore,
  A female captive, valued but at four.
  Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop
  When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
  Amid the ring each nervous rival stands,
  Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
  Close lock close, he sped,
  As closely following as the running thread
  The spindle follows, and displays the charms
  Of the fair spinster's breast and moving arms:
  Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies,
  And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;
  His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays:
  The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:
  To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,
  And send their souls before him as he flies.
  Now three times turn'd in prospect of the goal,
  The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul:
  "Assist, O goddess!" thus in thought he pray'd!
  And present at his thought descends the maid.
  Buoy'd by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
  All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain,
  Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain
  (O'erturn'd by Pallas), where the slippery shore
  Was clogg'd with slimy dung and mingled gore.
  (The self-same place beside Patroclus' pyre,
  Where late the slaughter'd victims fed the fire.)
  Besmear'd with filth, and blotted o'er with clay,
  Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay;
  The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,
  And left the urn Ulysses' rich reward.
  Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,
  The baffled hero thus the Greeks address'd:

  "Accursed fate! the conquest I forego;
  A mortal I, a goddess was my foe;
  She urged her favourite on the rapid way,
  And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day."

  Thus sourly wail'd he, sputtering dirt and gore;
  A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
  Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,
  Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest:

  "Why with our wiser elders should we strive?
  The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
  Ye in'd the king of men to rise.
  With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
  Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

  "Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
  O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
  In every martial game thy worth attest,
  And know thee both their greatest and their best.
  Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
  This beamy javelin in thy brother's war."

  Pleased from the hero's lips his praise to hear,
  The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
  But, set apart for sacred use, commands
  The glittering charger to Talthybius' hands.

                          [Illustration: CERES.]

                                  CERES.





BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.

THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.

The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector's body. Jupiter sends
Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to
Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old king,
notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for the
journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets forth
in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the charge of
Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young man, and
conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation on the way.
Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his feet, and begs for
the body of his son: Achilles, moved with compassion, grants his request,
detains him one night in his tent, and the next morning sends him home
with the body: the Trojans run out to meet him. The lamentations of
Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the solemnities of the funeral.

The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of Hector
lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the truce
allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achilles' camp, and
partly in Troy.

  Now from the finish'd games the Grecian band
  Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand,
  All stretch'd at ease the geniald in sable shade,
  Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
  And forth she paced, majestically sad.

  Then through the world of waters they repair
  (The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
  The deeps dividing, o'er the coast they rise,
  And touch with momentary flight the skies.
  There in the lightning's blaze the sire they found,
  And all the gods in shining synod round.
  Thetis approach'd with anguish in her face,
  (Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
  Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
  And offer'd from her hand the nectar-bowl:
  She tasted, and resign'd it: then began
  The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

  "Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o'ercast;
  Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
  Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
  But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares
  Nine days are past since all the court above
  In Hector's cause have moved the ear of Jove;
  'Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
  By stealth should bear him, but we will'd not so:
  We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
  And to his conquest add this glory more.
  Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:
  Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far;
  Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)
  Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead;
  But yield to ransom and the father's prayer;
  The mournful father, Iris shall prepare
  With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands
  Whate'er his honour asks, or heart demands."

  His word the silver-footed queen attends,
  And from Olympus' snowy tops descends.
  Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,
  And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:
  His friends prepare the victim, and dispose
  Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes;
  The goddess seats her by her pensive son,
  She press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "How long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow,
  And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:
  Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign
  Soothes weary life, and softens human pain?
erable man;)
  'Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
  Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
  Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey'd.
  A present goddess brought the high command,
  I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
  I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
  If in yon camp your powers have doom'd my fall,
  Content--By the same hand let me expire!
  Add to the slaughter'd son the wretched sire!
  One cold embrace at least may be allow'd,
  And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!"

  From forth his open'd stores, this said, he drew
  Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
  As many vests, as many mantles told,
  And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
  Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
  With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
  And last a large well-labour'd bowl had place,
  (The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
  Seem'd all too mean the stores he could employ,
  For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

  Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
  Around him furious drives his menial train:
  In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
  Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
  "What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries).
  Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
  Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
  Am I the only object of despair?
  Am I become my people's common show,
  Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
  No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
  The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
  Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
  Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
  I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,
  I see the ruins of your smoking town!
  O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,
  A willing ghost to Pluto's dreary dome!"

  He said, and feebly drives his friends away:
  The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
  Next on his sons his erring fury falls,
  Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;
  His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
  Hippo Thus arm'd, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
  And stoops on Hellespont's resounding sea.
  A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
  He seem'd; fair offspring of some princely line!
  Now twilight veil'd the glaring face of day,
  And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
  What time the herald and the hoary king
  (Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
  That circling Ilus' ancient marble flows)
  Allow'd their mules and steeds a short repose,
  Through the dim shade the herald first espies
  A man's approach, and thus to Priam cries:
  "I mark some foe's advance: O king! beware;
  This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
  For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
  Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
  Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
  Two wretched suppliannce, and enjoy'd the fire.
  For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race;
  One ship convey'd us from our native place;
  Polyctor is my sire, an honour'd name,
  Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame;
  Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast
  To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.
  To watch this quarter, my adventure falls:
  For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls;
  Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,
  And scarce their rulers check their martial rage."

  "If then thou art of stern Pelides' train,
  (The mournful monarch thus rejoin'd again,)
  Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid
  My son's dear relics? what befals him dead?
  Have dogs dismember'd (on the naked plains),
  Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?"

  "O favour'd of the skies! (thus answered then
  The power that mediates between god and men)
  Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent,
  But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:
  This the twelfth evening since he rested there,
  Untouch'd by worms, untainted by the air.
  Still as Aurora's ruddy beam is spread,
  Round his friend's tomb Achilles drags the dead:
  Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,
  All fresh he lies, with every living grace,
  Majestical in death! No stains are found
  O'er all the corse, and closed is every wound,
  Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,
  Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
  Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led
  A life so grateful, still regard him dead."

  Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,
  And joyful thus the royal sire replied:
  "Blest is the man who pays the gods above
  The constant tribute of respect and love!
  Those who inhabit the Olympian bower
  My son forgot not, in exalted power;
  And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,
  Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
  But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,
  A pledge of gratitude for Hector's sake;
  And while the favouring gods our steps survey,
  Safe to Pelides' tent conduct my way."

  To whom the laonly they are blest, and only free.
  Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood,
  The source of evil one, and one of good;
  From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
  Blessings to these, to those distributes ill;
  To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed
  To taste the bad unmix'd, is cursed indeed;
  Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
  He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
  The happiest taste not happiness sincere;
  But find the cordial draught is dash'd with care.
  Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power
  What stars concurring bless'd his natal hour!
  A realm, a goddess, to his wishes given;
  Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven.
  One evil yet o'ertakes his latest day:
  No race succeeding to imperial sway;
  An only son; and he, alas! ordain'd
  To fall untimely in a foreign land.
  See him, in Troy, the pious care decline
  Of his weak age, to live the curse of thine!
  Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld;
  In riches once, in children once excell'd;
  Extended Phrygia own'd thy ample reign,
  And all fair Lesbos' blissful seats contain,
  And all wide Hellespont's unmeasured main.
  But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,
  And fill thy measure from his bitter urn,
  What sees the sun, but hapless heroes' falls?
  War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
  What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed
  These unavailing sorrows o'er the dead;
  Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore,
  But thou, alas! may'st live to suffer more!"

  To whom the king: "O favour'd of the skies!
  Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies
  On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
  O give me Hector! to my eyes restore
  His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.
  Thou, as thou may'st, these boundless stores enjoy;
  Safe may'st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;
  So shall thy pity and forbearance give
  A weak old man to see the light and live!"

  "Move me no more, (Achilles thus replies,
  While kindling anger spah speed, if aught of thy desire
  Remains unask'd; what time the rites requit beholds, from Ilion's spire,
  The sad procession of her hoary sire;
  Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near,
  (Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,)
  A shower of tears o'erflows her beauteous eyes,
  Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries:

  "Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,
  Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy!
  If e'er ye rush'd in crowds, with vast delight,
  To hail your hero glorious from the fight,
  Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow;
  Your common triumph, and your common woe."

  In thronging crowds they issue to the plains;
  Nor man nor woman in the walls remains;
  In every face the self-same grief is shown;
  And Troy sends forth one universal groan.
  At Scaea's gates they meet the mourning wain,
  Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
  The wife and mother, frantic with despair,
  Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatter'd hair:
  Thus wildly wailing, ing grace;
  No mark of pain, or violence of face:
  Rosy and fair! as Phoebus' silver bow
  Dismiss'd thee gently to the shades below."

  Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
  Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears;
  Fast from the shining sluices of her eyes
  Fall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries.

  "Ah, dearest friend! in whom the gods had join'd(298)
  Tne mildest manners with the bravest mind,
  Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are o'er
  Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore,
  (O had I perish'd, ere that form divine
  Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!)
  Yet was it ne'er my fate, from thee to find
  A deed ungentle, or a word unkind.
  When others cursed the authoress of their woe,
  Thy pity check'd my sorrows in their flow.
  If some proud brother eyed me with disdain,
  Or scornful sister with her sweeping train,
  Thy gentle accents soften'd all my pain.
  For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee,
  The wretched source of all this misery.
  The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;
  Sad Helen has no friend, now thou art gone!
  Through Troy's wide streets abandon'd shall I roam!
  In Troy deserted, as abhorr'd at home!"

  So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye.
  Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.
  On all around the infectious sorrow grows;
  But Priam check'd the torrent as it rose:
  "Perform, ye Trojans! what the rites require,
  And fell the forests for a funeral pyre;
  Twelve days, nor foes nor secret ambush dread;
  Achilles grants these honours to the dead."(299)

                    [Illustration: FUNERAL OF HECTOR.]

                            FUNERAL OF HECTOR.


  He spoke, and, at his word, the Trojan train
  Their mules and oxen harness to the wain,
  Pour through the gates, and fell'd from Ida's crown,
  Roll back the gather'd forests to the town.
  These toils continue nine succeeding days,
  And high in air a sylvan structure raise.
  But when the tenth fair morn began to shine,
  Forth to the pile was borne the man an aedeto.

      "The voice," observes Heeren, "was always accompanied by some
      instrument. The bard was provided with a harp on which he played a
      prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he
      accompanied the song when begun. His voice probably preserved a
      medium between singing and recitation; the words, and not the melody
      were regarded by the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to
      remain intelligible to all. In countries where nothing similar is
      found, it is difficult to represent such scenes to the mind; but
      whoever has had an opportunity of listening to the improvisation of
      Italy, can easily form an idea of Demodocus and Phemius."--_Ancient
      Greece,_ p. 94.

    4 "Should it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing
      that "poplars can hardly live so long".  But setting aside the fact
      that we must not expect consistency in a mere romance, the ancients
      had a superstitious belief in the great age of trees which grew near
      places consecrated by the presland._ Heraclid. Pont. Alleg. Hom. p. 531-5, of Gale's Opusc.
      Mythol. Dionys. Halic. de Hom. Poes. c. 15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s.
      f.

   14 Vit. Hom. Section 28.

   15 The riddle is given in Section 35. Compare Mackenzie's note, p. xxx.

   16 Heeren's Ancient Greece, p. 96.

   17 Compare Sir E. L. Bulwer's Caxtons v. i. p. 4.

   18 Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387.

   19 Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147.

   20 Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation of which
      I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.

          "Origias, farewell! and oh! remember me
          Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea,
          A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,
          And ask you, maid, of all the bards you boast,
          Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most
          Oh! answer all,--'A blind old man and poor
        Sweetest he sings--and dwells on Chios' rocky shore.'"

                                                   _See_ Thucyd. iii, 104.

   21 Longin., de Sublim., ix. Section 26. Othen en tae Odysseia
      pareikasai tis an kataduomeno ton Omaeron haelio, oo dixa taes
      sphodrotaetos paramenei to megethos

   22 See Tatian, quoted in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr. Mackenzie
      has given three brief but elaborate papers on the different writn Achilleis."--Grote, vol.
      ii. p. 235

   33 K. R. H. Mackenzie, Notes and Queries, p. 222 sqq.

   34 See his Epistle to Raphelingius, in Schroeder's edition, 4to.,
      Delphis, 1728.

   35 Ancient Greece, p. 101.

   36 The best description of this monument will be found in Vaux's
      "Antiquities of the British Museum," p. 198 sq. The monument itself
      (Towneley Sculptures, No. 123) is well known.

   37 Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 276.

   38 Preface to her Homer.

   39 Hesiod. Opp. et Dier. Lib. I. vers. 155, &c.

   40 The following argument of the Iliad, corrected in a few particulars,
      is translated from Bitaube, and is, perhaps, the neatest summary
      that has ever been drawn up:--"A hero, injured by his general, and
      animated with a noble resentment, retires to his tent; and for a
      season withdraws himself and his troops from the war. During this
      interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has been
      occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of
      which the honour of their country depends. The general, at length
      opening his eyes to the fault which he had committed, deputes the
      principal officers of his army to the incensed hero, with commission
      to make compensation for the injury, and to tender magnificent
      presents. The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his
      character, persists in his animosity; the army is again defeated,
      and is on the verge of entire destruction. This inexorable man has a
      friend; this friend weeps before him, and asks for the hero's arms,
      and for permission to go to the war in his stead. The eloquence of
      friendship prevails more than the intercession of the ambassadors or
      the gifts of the general. He lends his armour to his friend, but
      commands him not to engage with the chief of the enemy's army,
      because he reserves to himself the honour of that combat, and
      because he also fears for his friend's life. The midons dwelt on the southern borders of Thessaly, and took
      their origin from Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. It is
      fancifully supposed that the name was derived from myrmaex, an
      _ant,_ "because they imitated the diligence of the ants, and like
      them were indefatigable, continually employed in cultivating the
      earth; the change from ants to men is founded merely on the
      equivocation of their name, which resembles that of the ant: they
      bore a further resemblance to these little animals, in that instead
      of inhabiting towns or villages, at first they commonly resided in
      the open fields, having no other retreats but dens and the cavities
      of trees, until Ithacus brought them together, and settled them in
      more secure and comfortable habitations."--Anthon's "Lempriere."

   57 Eustathius, after Heraclides Ponticus and others, allegorizes this
      apparition, as if the appearance of Minerva to Achilles, unseen by
      the rest, was intended to point out the sudden recollection that he
      would gain nothing by intemperate wrath, and that it were best to
      restrain his anger, and only gratify it by withdrawing his services.
      The same idea is rather cleverly worked out by Apuleius, "De Deo
      Socratis."

   58 Compare Milton, "Paradise Lost," bk. ii:

          "Though his tongue
        Dropp'd manna."

      So Proverbs v. 3, "For the lips of a strange woman drop as an
      honey-comb."

   59 Salt water was chiefly used in lustrations, from its being supposed
      to possess certain fiery particles. Hence, if sea-water could not be
      obtained, salt was thrown into the fresh water to be used for the
      lustration. Menander, in Clem. Alex. vii. p.713, hydati perriranai,
      embalon alas, phakois.

   60 The persons of heralds were held inviolable, and they were at
      liberty to travel whither they would without fear of molestation.
      Poulcan.

        "Nor was his name unheard or unadored
        In ancient Greece, and in Ausonian land
        Men call'd him Mulciber, and how he fell
        From heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
        Sheer o'er the crystal battlements from morn
        To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
        A summer's day and with the setting sun
        Dropp'd from the zenith like a falling star
        On Lemnos, th' Aegean isle thus they relate."

                                                   "Paradise Lost," i. 738

   75 It is ingeniously observed by Grote, vol i p. 463, that "The gods
      formed a sort of political community of their own which had its
      hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and duties, its contentions for
      power and occasional revolutions, its public meetings in the agora
      of Olympus, and its multitudinous banquets orsit down. "A _standing_
      agora is a symptom of manifest terror (II. Xviii. 246) an evening
      agora, to which men came elevated by wine, is also the forerunner of
      mischief ('Odyssey,' iii. 138)."--Grote, ii. p. 91, _note._

   83 This sceptre, like that of Judah (Genesis xlix. 10), is a type of
      the supreme and far-spread dominion of the house of the Atrides. See
      Thucydides i. 9. "It is traced through the hands of Hermes, he being
      the wealth giving god, whose blessing is most efficacious in
      furthering the process of acquisition."--Grote, i. p. 212. Compare
      Quintus Calaber (Dyce's Selections, p. 43).

          "Thus the monarch spoke,
        Then pledged the chief in a capacious cup,
        Golden, and framed by art divine (a gift
        Which to Almighty Jove lame Vulcan brought
        Upon his nuptial day, when he espoused
        The Queen of Love), the sire of gods bestow'd
        The cup on Dardanus, who gave it next
        To Ericthonius Tros received it then,
        And left it, with his wealth, to be possess'd
        By Ilus he to great Laomedon
        Gave it, and last to Priam's lot it fell."

   84 Grote, i, p. 393, states the number of the Grecian forces at upwards
      of 100,000 men. Nichols makes a total of 135,000.

           85 "As thick as when a field
        Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends
        His bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
        Sways them."--Paradise Lost," iv. 980, sqq.

   86 This sentiment used to be a popular one with some of the greatest
      tyrants, who abused it into a pretext for unlimited usurpation of
      power. Dion, Caligula, and Domitian were particularly fond of it,
      and, in an extended form, we find the maxim propounded by Creon in
      the Antigone of Sophocles. See some important remarks of Heeren,
      "Ancient Greece," ch. vi. p. 105.

   87 It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting and
      contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the rom the
      peculiar colour of its waters, still applicable to the Mendere, the
      yellow colour of whose waters attracts the attention of travellers.

   99 It should be "his _chest_ like Neptune." The torso of Neptune, in
      the "Elgin Marbles," No. 103, (vol. ii. p. 26,) is remarkable for
      its breadth and massiveness of development.

          1es observes that the Boeotian vessels,
      which carried one hundred and twenty men each, were probably meant
      to be the largest in the fleet, and those of Philoctetes, carrying
      fifty each, the smallest. The average would be eighty-five, and
      Thucydides supposes the troops to have rowed and navigated
      themselves; and that very few, besides the chiefs, went as mere
      passengers or landsmen. In short, we have in the Homeric
      descriptions the complete picture of an Indian or African war canoe,
      many of which are considerably larger than the largest scale
      assigned to those of the Greeks. If the total number of the Greek
      ships be taken at twelve hundred, according to Thucydides, although
ight in varied ranks descried:
        And each with outstretch'd neck his rank maintains,
        In marshall'd order through th' ethereal void."

                            Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoe's Life, Appendix.

      See Cary's Dante: "Hell," canto v.

        _  109 Silent, breathing rage._
          "Thus they,
        Breathing united force with fixed thought,
        Moved on in silence."

                                             "Paradise Lost," book i. 559.

          110 "As when some peasant in a bushy brake
        Has with unwary footing press'd a snake;
        He starts aside, astonish'd, when he spies
        His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes"

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 510.

  111 Dysparis, i.e. unlucky, ill fated, Paris. This alludes to the evilsder the accents rise, and yet more loud,
        Like thunders rolling from a distant cloud."

                                        Merrick's "Tryphiodorus," 148, 99.

  117 Duport, "Gnomol. Homer," p. 20, well observes that this comparison
      may also be sarcastically applied to the _frigid_ style of oratory.
      It, of course, here merely denotes the ready fluency of Ulysses.

  118 --_Her brothers' doom._ They perished in combat with Lynceus and
      Idas, whilst besieging Sparta. See Hygin. Poet Astr. 32, 22. Virgil
      and others, however, make them share immortality by turns.

  119 Idreus was the arm-bearer and charioteer of king Priam, slain during
      this war. Cf. Ä†n, vi. 487.

  120 --_Scaea's gates,_ rather _Scaean gates,_ _i.e._ the left-hand gates.

  121 This was customary in all sacrifices. Hence we find Iras descending
      to cut off the hair of Dido, before which she could not expire.

  122 --_Nor pierced._

        "This said, his feeble hand a jav'lin threw,
        Which, flutt'ring, seemed to loiter as it flew,
        Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
        And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 742.

_  123 Reveal'd the queen._

        "Thus having said, she turn'd and made appear
        Her neck refulgent and dishevell'd hair,
        Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach'd the ground,
        And widely spread ambrosial scents around.
        In length of train descends her sweeping gown;
        And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, i. 556.

  124 --_Cranae's isle, i.e._ Athens. See the "Schol." and Alberti's
      "Hesychius," vol. ii. p. 338. This name was derived from one of its
      early kings, Cranaus.

  125 --_The martial maid._ In the original, "Minerva Alalcomeneis," _i.e.
      the defender,_ so called from her temple at Alalcomene in Boeotia.

  126 "Anything for a quiet                          "Paradise Lost," xi. 411.

  146 --_The race of those._

        "A pair of coursers, born of heav'nly breed,
        Who from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire;
        Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
        By substituting mares produced on earth,
        Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth.

                                           Dryden's Virgil, vii. 386, sqq.

  147 The belief in the existence of men of larger stature in earlier
      times, is by no means confined to Homer.

  148 --_Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor,_ or blood of the gods.

        "A stream of nect'rous humour issuing flow'd,
        Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," vi. 339.

  149 This was during the wars with the Titans.

  150 --_Amphitryon's son,_ Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife of
      Amphitryon.

  151 --_Ä†giale_ daughter of Adrastus. The Cyclic poets (See Anthon's
      Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in
      revenge for the wound she had received from her husband.

  152 --_Pherae,_ a town of Pelasgiotis, in Thessaly.

  153 --_Tlepolemus,_ son of Hercules and Astyochia. Having left his native
      country, Argos, in consequence of the accidental murder of
      Liscymnius, he was commanded by an oracle to retire to Rhodes. Here
      he was chosen king, and accompanied the Trojan expedition. After his
      death, certain games were instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the
      victors being rewarded with crowns of poplar.

  15lustrated
      by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298: "The poet's method
      of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a curious manner
      his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where, for example,
      one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to be executed
      at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of this task
      is not, as a general rule, immediately described. A certain interval
      is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action, which
      interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary
      continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a
      while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further
      account of the mission is resumed."

  168 --_With tablets sealed._ These probably were only devices of a
      hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric
      times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq.

  169 --_Solymaean crew,_ a people of Lycia.

  170 From this "melancholy madness" of Bellerophon, hypochondria received
      the name of "Morbus Bellerophonteus." See my notes in my prose
      translation, p. 112. The "Aleian field," _i.e._ "the plain of
      wandering," was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in
      Cilicia.

  171 --_His own, of gold._ This bad bargain has passed into a common
      proverb. See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23.

  172 --_Scaean, i e._ left hand.

  173 --_In fifty chambers._

        "The fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,
        So large a promise of a progeny,)
        The ports of plated gold, and hhe necessity of other means of protection.
      Accordingly, in the battles previous to the eighth book, no allusion
      occurs to a rampart; in all those which follow it forms a prominent
      feature. Here, then, in the anomaly as in the propriety of the
      Iliad, the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis of
      it, forms the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem."--Mure,
      vol. i., p. 257.

  187 --_What cause of fear,_ &c.

        "Seest thou not this? Or do we fear in vain
        Thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?"

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, iv. 304.

  188 --_In exchange._ These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the Roman
      lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. Section 1, as exhibiting the most ancient
      mention of barter.

  189 "A similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the
      narrative, is the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of
      the eighth book, against any further interference of the gods in the
      battles. In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is
      withdrawn. During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily
      in view. No interposition takes place but on the part of the
      specially authorised agents of Jove, or on that of one or two
      contumacious deities, described as boldly setting his commands at
      defiance, but checked and reprimanded for their disobedience; while
      the other divine warriors, who in the previous and subsequent cantos
      are so active in support of their favourite heroes, repeatedly
      allude to the supreme edict as the cause of their present
      inactivity."--Mure, vol. i. p 257. See however, Muller, "Greek
      Literature," ch. v. Section 6, and Grote, vol. ii. p. 252.

          190 "As far removed from God and light of heaven,
        As from the centre thrice to th' utmost pole."

                                                         --"Paradise Lost."

        "E quanto e da le stellnce._ Rather: "use well-omened words;" or, as
      Kennedy has explained it, "Abstain from expressions unsuitable to
      the solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might
      defeat the object of their supplications."

  206 --_Purest hands._ This is one of the most ancient superstitions
      respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in
      tradition.

  207 It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled
      siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in
      piratical expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of
      which Achilles now speaks. From the following verses, it is evident
      that fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the
      expedition, and not to the successful plunderer.

  208 --_Pthia,_ the capital of Achilles' Thessalian domains.

  209 --_Orchomenian town._ The topography of Orchomenus, in Boeotia,
      "situated," as it was, "on the northern bank of the lake Ä†pais,
      which receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of
      Phocis, but also other rivers from Parnassus and Helicon" (Grote,
      vol. p. 181), was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay.
      "As long as the channels of these waters were diligently watched and
      kept clear, a large portion of the lake was in the condition of
      alluvial land, pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels
      came to be eitherinsure, whilst his warm blood doth
                    flow,
        And his light knees have power to move: but (maistred by his
                    wound)
        Embost within a shady hill, the jackals charge him round,
        And teare his flesh--when instantly fortune sends in the powers
        Of some sterne lion, with whose sighte they flie and he devours.
        So they around Ulysses prest."

                                                                 --Chapman.

  224 --_Simois, railing,_ &c.

          "In those bloody fields
        Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
        Of heroes."

                                                 --Dryden's Virgil, i. 142.

          225 "Where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies,
        Stones rent from stones,--where clouds of dust arise,--
        Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place,
        Below the wall's foundation drives his mace,
        And heaves the building from the solid base."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 825.

  226 --_Why boast we._

          "Wherefore do I assume
        These royalties and not refuse to reign,
        Refusing to accept as great a share
        Of hazarn to the poet, apparently as a native hero,
      Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow
      his descent to be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy
      recorded by later writers, he is likewise the adopted son of
      Asterius, as descendant of Dorus, the son of Helen, and is thus
      connected with a colony said to have been led into Creta by
      Tentamus, or Tectamus, son of Dorus, who is related either to have
      crossed over from Thessaly, or to have embarked at Malea after
      having led his followers by land into Laconia."--Thirlwall, p. 136,
      seq.

  237 Milton has emulated this passage, in describing the couch of our
      first parents:--

          "Underneath the violet,
        Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
        'Broider'd the ground."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 700.

  238 --_He lies protected,_

        "Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
        By angels many and strong, who interpos'd
        Defence, while others bore him on their shields
        Back to his chariot, where it stood retir'd
        From off the files of war; there they him laid,
        Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame."

                                            "Paradise Lost," vi. 335, seq.

  239 --_The brazen dome._ See the note on Bk. viii. Page 142.

  240 --_For, by the gods! who flies._ Observe the bold ellipsis of "he
      cries," and the transition from the direct to the oblique
      construction. So in Milton:--

        "Thus at their shady lodge arriv'd, both stood,
        Both turn'd, and under open sky ador'd
        The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
        Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe,
        And starry pole.--Thou also mad'st the night,
        Maker omnipotent, and thou the day."

                                         Milton, "Paradise Lost," Book iv.

  241 --_So some tall rock._

        "But like a rock unmov'd, a rock m by the hands of another."--Coleridge, p.
      156. seq.

  246 --_Thrice at the battlements._ "The art military of the Homeric age
      is upon a level with the state of navigation just described,
      personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the
      ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale.
      The chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights
      of romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a
      captain in the guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a
      ditch or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself
      was accessible without a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of
      earth with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in
      armour. The Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive
      assistance from their allies to the very end."--Coleridge, p. 212.

  247 --_Ciconians._--A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus.

  248 --_They wept._

        "Fast by the manger stands the inactive steed,
        And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;
        He stands, and careless of his golden grain,
        Weeps his associates and his master slain."

                                         Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.

        "Nothing is heard upon the mountains now,
        But pensive herds that for their master low,
        Straggling and comfortless about they rove,
        Unmindful of their pasture and their love."

                                         Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._

        "To close the pomp, Ä†thon, the steed of state,
        Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait.
        Stripp'd of his trappings, with a sullen pace
        He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, bk. ii

  249 --_Some brawny bull._

        "Like to a bull, that with impetuous spring
     -8.

          261 "Swift from his throne the infernal monarch ran,
        All pale and trembling, lest the race of man,
        Slain by Jove's wrath, and led by Hermes' rod,
        Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq.

  262 These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might be
      delayed, but never wholly set aside.

  263 It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal, to
      behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22.

          264 "Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow'rs arose,
        In humble vales they built their soft abodes."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, iii. 150.

  265 --_Along the level seas._ Compare Virgil's description of Camilla,
      who

        "Outstripp'd the winds in speed upon the plain,
        Flew o'er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain:
        She swept the seas, and, as she skimm'd along,
        Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung."

                                                        Dryden, vii. 1100.

  266 --_The future father._ "Ä†neas and Antenor stand distinguished from
      the other Trojans by a dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy
      with the Greeks, which is by Sophocles and others construed as
      treacherous collusion,--a suspicion indirectly glanced at, though
      emphatically repelled, in the Ä†neas of Virgil."--Grote, i. p. 427.

  267 Neptune thus recounts his services to Ä†neas:

        "When your Ä†neas fought, but fought with odds
        Of force unequal, and unequal gods:
        I spread a cloud before the victor's sight,
        Sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secured his flight--
        Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
        The vow'd destruction of ungrateful Troy."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, v. 1058.

  268 --_On Polydore._ Euripides, Virgil, and others, relate that Polydore
      was sent into Thrace
        But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace
        Deforms the manly features of thy face?"

                                                          Dryden, xi. 369.

  284 --_Like a thin smoke._ Virgil, Georg. iv. 72.

        "In vain I reach my feeble hands to join
        In sweet embraces--ah! no longer thine!
        She said, and from his eyes the fleeting fair
        Retired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air."

                                                                   Dryden.

  285 So Milton:--

          "So eagerly the fiend
        O'er bog, o'er steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
        With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
        And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," ii. 948.

          286 "An ancient forest, for the work design'd
        (The shady covert of the savage kind).
        The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed:
        Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the tow'ring pride
        Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
        And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
        High trunks of trees, fell'd from the steepy crown
        Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, vi. 261.

  287 --_He vowed._ This was a very ancient custom.

  288 The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity of
      the deceased, and the honour in which he was held.

  289 On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern nations,
      see Mallet, p. 213.

  290 --_And calls the spirit._ Such was the custom anciently, even at the
      Roman funerals.

        "Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
        Paternal ashes, now revived in vain."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 106.

  291 Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better moral
      from this episode than Homer. The following lines deserve
  e been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which,
      even after death, was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades.
      Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks
      pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession of his just rights
      of retribution."--Mure, vol. i. 289.

  297 Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.

        "Here, from the tow'r by stern Ulysses thrown,
        Andromache bewail'd her infant son."

                                           Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 675.

  298 The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant and
      interesting view of Helen's character--

      "Few things are more interesting than to observe how the same hand
      that has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us
      also the consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is through
      the Iliad a genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech, noble in
      her associations, full of remorse for a fault for which higher
      powers seem responsible, yet grateful and affectionate towards those
      with whom that fault had committed her. I have always thought the
      following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and hints at her own
      invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as almost the sweetest
      passage in the poem. It is another striking instance of that
      refinement of feeling and softness of tone which so generally
      distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the rest."--Classic
      Poets, p. 198, seq.

  299 "And here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to
      exalt and purify our impression of his character. We had accompanied
      him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of
      his stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full
      influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of
      his great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a
      few short days the mighty being irg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
dier of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR